718 brjana BJA: British Journal of Anaesthesia Br J Anaesth Elsevier PMC12226740 12226740 12226740 40425394 10.1016/j.bja.2025.04.027 Directed acyclic graphs to minimise bias and optimise causal inference in SNAP-3: an observational cohort study of frailty, multimorbidity, and delirium in older surgical patients Swarbrick Claire J 1 2 3 ⁎ † Blake Helen A 4 † Martin Peter 4 Partridge Judith SL 5 6 Moppett Iain K 1 2 3 1 Anaesthesia &amp; Critical Care, Injury, Recovery and Inflammation Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK 2 Centre for Research and Improvement, Royal College of Anaesthetists, London, UK 3 Royal Devon University Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, UK 4 Department of Primary Care and Population Health, University College London, London, UK 5 Perioperative medicine for Older People undergoing Surgery (POPS), Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK 6 School of Population Health &amp; Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College Hospital, London, UK ⁎ Corresponding author. Anaesthesia &amp; Critical Care, Injury, Recovery and Inflammation Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK. Claire.swarbrick@nottingham.ac.uk Twitter icon @iainmoppett † Joint first authors. 27 5 2025 135 1 177 177–187 5 7 2025 © 2025 The Author(s) This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). See editorial " DAGs for dummies: how to extract causation from correlation " on page 837. Abstract Background The 3rd Sprint National Anaesthesia Project (SNAP-3) aims to describe the impact of frailty, multimorbidity, and delirium, and their management, on outcomes after surgery within the older surgical population. Causal diagrams, such as directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), are a useful tool for visually representing relationships between variables and for clarifying the causal assumptions underlying a chosen statistical model. Methods A description of how the SNAP-3 cohort study's DAGs were developed is provided. DAGs have been created for the exposure–outcome relationships between frailty, multimorbidity, and delirium (as an exposure) with postoperative outcomes (length of hospital stay, delirium, morbidity, mortality). DAGs were created following the approach of ‘Evidence synthesis for constructing directed acyclic graphs’, and revised after independent clinical expert input. Results DAGs provide visual representations of assumptions made, and provide an objective approach to appropriate statistical adjustments. Key nodes within all the DAGs included age, dementia, genetic predisposition, hearing and visual impairment, length of stay, malignancy, operative severity, polypharmacy, postoperative perioperative medicine service, preoperative clinic review, sex, social deprivation, urgency, with delirium, frailty, multimorbidity, interaction, morbidity acting as exposures, or outcomes in certain DAGs. Conclusions DAGs provide a transparent framework for statistical decision-making in observational research. We provide an overview of DAGs using the SNAP-3 DAGs as examples to explain fundamental concepts for developing and using causal diagrams. This overview acknowledges the complexities of exploring clinical relationships and the assumptions that are necessary, providing an opportunity for critique of the relationships described and refinements for future studies. Keywords: directed acyclic graphs, epidemiology, frailty syndrome, geriatric medicine, multimorbidity, perioperative care, surgery status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Received 2024 Dec 20; Accepted 2025 Apr 19; Issue date 2025 Jul. Editor's key points • The 3rd Sprint National Anaesthesia Project (SNAP-3) is an observational cohort study designed to describe the impact of frailty, multimorbidity, and delirium on outcomes after surgery in older surgical patients. • This special article reviews the use of directed acyclic graphs, which are rarely applied to perioperative medicine studies, as a useful tool for visually representing relationships between variables and for clarifying causal assumptions underlying a chosen statistical model, as used in the SNAP-3 study. • When used appropriately, directed acyclic graphs can enhance epidemiological observational studies to optimise their ability to infer causality by providing an objective approach to statistical adjustments. Approximately one in five of the UK surgical population aged ≥60 years is living with frailty and two-thirds with multimorbidity. 1 Despite the frequency of these conditions, their relative contribution to adverse postoperative outcomes is not well understood. The 3rd Sprint National Anaesthesia Project (SNAP-3) study aims to describe the impact of frailty, multimorbidity, and delirium, and their management, on outcomes after surgery. 28 This observational cohort study has been designed to go beyond describing associations, exploring the causal effects of these exposures on postoperative outcomes. To achieve this, causal diagrams have been used to explicitly identify and account for the covariates influencing the key exposure–outcome relationships. As with all observational studies, estimation of the effect of an exposure on an outcome needs to consider potential confounding. We can use causal inference methods to minimise confounding bias in the estimation of such an effect, for example by developing a regression model to ‘adjust for’ (or ‘condition on’) confounding variables. It is important that this process is conducted in a transparent, logical, and clinically relevant manner by clarifying assumptions about causal relationships between variables. This is because the choice of adjustment variables is vital for the validity of causal inferences. Failure to adjust for a relevant confounding variable would lead to underadjustment. On the other hand, variables that are mediators (on the causal pathway from exposure to outcome) or colliders (causally affected by both the exposure and the outcome) should not be adjusted for; doing so is referred to as overadjustment. Both under- and overadjustment can lead to biased estimates and erroneous conclusions regarding the strength or direction of the causal effect of interest. 2 This paper serves two key purposes: first, to explain the methodology of causal diagrams, and second, to present the SNAP-3 causal diagrams as illustrative examples of this methodology. The SNAP-3 causal diagrams formally document our assumptions and methods, providing a framework for other researchers to critique, refine, and expand upon as new evidence emerges regarding frailty, multimorbidity, and delirium in older surgical patients. Methods Causal diagrams are a useful tool for visually representing relationships between variables, and can be used to inform study design and statistical analysis. 3 All statistical models require assumptions, whether these are made explicitly or inferred implicitly. By elucidating causal assumptions using a directed acyclic graph (DAG) or other methods, researchers can ensure these assumptions are based on available evidence and known causal relationships, thus informing modelling choices in a systematic and transparent manner. This also means that model choices can be subjected to critical evaluation from specialists and other researchers, enabling them to understand and critique assumptions and ultimately propose different models as the evidence base evolves. Their construction is informed by the available literature, a comprehensive understanding of the complex relationships in the real-world context, and the statistical principles governing causal inference. The importance of DAGs has been increasingly recognised owing to the abundance of ‘big data’, where the availability of large datasets containing numerous variables can tempt researchers to search for statistical associations which are not grounded in clinical knowledge or a scientific evidence base. DAGs are helpful in medical research because they allow depiction of the complex interplay of clinical factors affecting exposure and outcome relationships. The SNAP-3 study team produced seven DAGs to describe assumptions about seven exposure–outcome relationships. In this paper, we will focus on the relationship between the exposures: frailty and multimorbidity, and the outcome: postoperative morbidity. The principles that we use extend to other research questions that SNAP-3 is designed to answer ( Supplementary material ). Fundamentals of directed acyclic graphs Specific terminology is used to describe how DAGs are constructed and applied to statistical models. To illustrate this terminology, we consider simple DAGs produced in DAGitty, an online tool used to create, edit, and analyse causal diagrams. DAGitty uses a colour-coded system to indicate different types of nodes and edges, and is available through a web browser at https://dagitty.net/ or as an R package (Institute for Computing and Information Sciences, Radboud University, and Medical BioSciences department, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands) ‘dagitty’ on the Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) or on github. 4 , 5 The DAGitty interface is intuitive to use, and code can easily be shared between collaborators working on a causal diagram. In causal diagrams, variables are represented by ‘ nodes ’ (labelled points or shapes) and relationships by ‘ edges ’ (lines/arrows between nodes). A path or pathway describes any sequence of one or more edges, whether the edges all point in the same direction or in different directions. DAGs are a type of causal diagram where the edges are all unidirectional (depicted as a single-headed arrow), and the diagram is acyclic , that is, there are no cycles (where following a sequence of directed arrows would lead you back to the starting node). For example, Fig. 1 shows a very simple DAG with three nodes, represented by ovals: ‘cause’, ’effect’, and ‘unrelated variable’. Figure 1 only has one directed edge, represented by an arrow pointing from ‘cause’ to ‘effect’. The absence of arrows leading from or towards ‘unrelated variable’ encodes the assumption that ‘unrelated variable’ is unrelated to either ‘cause’ or ‘effect’. 4 , 6 Note that arrows in DAGs are not deterministic: having an arrow from ‘cause’ to ‘effect’ does not mean that the ‘cause’ always leads to the ‘effect’. Rather, this arrow represents the assumption that the ‘cause’ affects the chance of having the ‘effect’. We consider a simplified clinical example in Fig. 2 , looking at the relationship between frailty and postoperative morbidity. Figure 2 a shows two variables: ‘frailty’ and ‘postoperative morbidity’. We believe that there is a causal relationship between these two variables, and so we added an arrow from ‘frailty’ to ‘postoperative morbidity’ to reflect our assumption. We designated these variables to be the exposure (denoted in DAGitty as green background, bold black outline, black arrowhead symbol) and outcome (blue background, black vertical line symbol), respectively. For the purpose of a DAG, neither the strength nor the sign (positive or negative) of a causal relationship is relevant: the arrow from ‘frailty’ to ‘postoperative morbidity’ in Fig. 2 a does not itself encode any information about whether this is a strong or weak relationship, nor whether frailty leads to an increased or decreased chance of postoperative morbidity. A causal pathway is a series of edges that represent relationships from the exposure to the outcome. Causal paths can either be direct (consisting of a single arrow), as in Fig. 2 a, or indirect (consisting of multiple arrows, all with the same direction). DAGitty denotes causal pathways using green arrow ( Fig 2 ). Variables on a causal pathway between an exposure and outcome are mediators . For example, Fig. 2 b shows a causal pathway via the variable ‘urgency of surgery’ encoding our causal assumptions that living with frailty influences urgency of surgery, which itself is a cause of postoperative morbidity. The assumption that frailty influences surgical urgency is made based upon studies that demonstrate a high prevalence of frailty in patients undergoing emergency surgery ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Thus, the variable ‘urgency of surgery’ is a mediator variable for the relationship between frailty and postoperative morbidity. Noncausal pathways are a series of edges between exposure and outcome that do not all point in the same direction and do not identify a causal path between exposure and outcome. For example, consider Fig. 2 c, which depicts a noncausal path, where the variable ‘age’ is a common cause of both the exposure and the outcome (i.e. has arrows pointing to each of the exposure and outcome). This also means that age is acting as a confounding variable in this example. The variable's red background indicates that this variable is an ancestor of both exposure and outcome; DAGitty uses green backgrounds to denote ancestors of exposure but not outcome, and blue backgrounds to denote ancestors of outcome but not exposure. Figure 2 d gives another example. We added a different noncausal path to Fig. 2 a, where the variable representing length of stay, ‘LOS’, has two incoming arrows from ‘frailty’ and ‘postoperative morbidity’. This variable is a collider on the noncausal path. When using a DAG to decide how to adjust for confounding, we look at whether these noncausal paths are ‘open’ or ‘closed’. The aim is to obtain an estimate of the exposure–outcome relationship that is not biased because of confounding by closing or ‘blocking’ noncausal paths. DAGitty denotes noncausal pathways using black arrows if the path is blocked or red arrows is the path is open. Paths are blocked if the path contains a collider that is not adjusted for (and does not have any descendants that are adjusted for). Paths can also be blocked by adjusting for non-colliders. Returning to Fig. 2 , the noncausal path in Fig. 2 c is open. We can block this path by adjusting for the confounding variable ‘age’. This improves the estimation of the causal effect of ‘frailty’ on ‘postoperative morbidity’ because although there are many people who do not live with frailty but experience postoperative morbidity, living with frailty makes it more likely that a postoperative complication will occur. Also, ‘postoperative morbidity’ is more common amongst older people than the general population. So, ignoring information about being older would likely lead to overestimation of the causal effect. In contrast, the noncausal path in Fig. 2 d is closed because of the collider variable ‘LOS’. If we adjusted for this, the path would be opened, and we would introduce spurious associations or collider bias. In order to accurately estimate the total effect of exposure on outcome, it is necessary to close all noncausal paths by adjusting for the confounding variables without opening any noncausal pathways. We can see from our simple clinical example that we should adjust for ‘age’, as this is a confounding variable ( Fig. 2 c). However, we do not want to adjust for either ‘urgency of surgery’ ( Fig. 2 b) or ‘LOS’ ( Fig. 2 d). Adjusting for ‘urgency of surgery’ is incorrect because it is on the casual pathway and mediates the effect of ‘frailty’ on ‘postoperative morbidity’. Adjusting for ‘LOS’ would induce collider bias because both ’frailty’ and ‘postoperative morbidity’ influence ‘LOS’, making it a collider. If we adjust for ‘LOS’, we inadvertently create a spurious association between frailty and postoperative morbidity that might not reflect a true causal relationship. This could distort the analysis by opening a noncausal pathway, leading to misleading conclusions about the direct effect of frailty on postoperative morbidity. Note that both ‘urgency of surgery’ and ‘LOS’ are descendants of the ‘frailty’ variable, that is, on directed paths leading away from ‘frailty’. Temporally speaking, we could say that these nodes occur after the ‘frailty’ variable. A general rule when thinking about which variables should be adjusted for in a DAG is to exclude descendants of the exposure. Applying directed acyclic graphs As the use of DAGs is unfamiliar to many researchers and clinicians, an overview of the steps involved in the construction and use of a DAG is outlined in Table 1 and in the description in the following sections. A fuller explanation can be found elsewhere. 7 , 8 Here, we take a research question from SNAP-3 and work through the steps described in Table 1 using the DAGitty software. 9 Step 1: define the research question Clearly articulate the research question, identifying the exposure and outcome variables, eligibility criteria, the timing of exposure measurement, and follow-up. In this SNAP-3 example, the research question is ‘How do frailty and multimorbidity impact postoperative morbidity for older surgical patients in the UK?’. 28 This specifies the causal pathway of interest between exposure and outcome. We have built upon the example used in Fig. 2 . The timing of when the exposure is assessed is key to determining whether other variables are confounding variables (occurring before the exposure) or mediators (occurring after exposure). In SNAP-3, frailty was assessed using the Clinical Frailty Scale (CFS) at surgical admission. Here, the surgical admission is the baseline or start of follow-up, known as ‘time zero’ in the context of target trial emulation. 12 Steps 2 and 3: decide if a DAG would help to answer the proposed research question, and identify the relevant variables that impact the exposure–outcome relationship If a DAG is deemed to be helpful, at this stage, DAG use should be written into the study protocol and data analysis plan. The relationship between frailty and multimorbidity with postoperative morbidity in older surgical patients is complicated by many variables, so we agreed to construct a DAG for this relationship. After literature review and expert refinement of the derived list, we listed the relevant variables in Fig. 3 . We made decisions about how to define these variables as nodes to minimise bias, confounding, ‘double counting’, and mismeasurement. A key yet sometimes overlooked aspect of the model construction is that variables should be included only once. In the SNAP-3 example DAGs, we included multimorbidity and dementia. Multimorbidity is commonly defined as the co-existence of two or more comorbidities; as dementia is a comorbidity, if it were to be included within the composite definition of multimorbidity, its effects would be considered twice. In the SNAP-3 dataset, the multimorbidity variable has been carefully constructed from raw data to exclude dementia. We propose that dementia is a key causal factor for postoperative morbidity in its own right; it must therefore not be also included in the composite definition of multimorbidity used in the DAG or the model. In our research question, we are considering the combined effect of frailty and multimorbidity on postoperative morbidity. 28 The nature of the relationship between frailty and multimorbidity is a topic of investigation. The accumulating deficits model of frailty, which forms the framework for the CFS, directs us to have an edge from multimorbidity as a contributing deficit towards frailty. However, the reality is that their relationship is not straightforward; people who live with frailty do not always have multimorbidity as a contributing factor, and other deficits can contribute. Additionally, a small subset of individuals living with frailty have undiagnosed multimorbidity, having not sought medical attention for the conditions. Thus, the relationship between multimorbidity and frailty is not always clear; frailty can arise independently of multimorbidity, and frailty itself often leads to further comorbidities and an accumulation of deficits, exacerbating the severity of multimorbidity. 1 , 13 To address this complexity, we have used an interaction term to create a so-called ‘joint exposure’ to allow us to model the combined effect of frailty and multimorbidity on postoperative outcomes. This approach acknowledges that the effect of frailty on postoperative outcomes might be affected by multimorbidity, and vice versa that the effect of multimorbidity might be affected by frailty. This is an example of when, in complex clinical settings, interest might focus on the combined effect of two exposures, and the causal effect of one exposure might depend on the other exposure. This might plausibly be the case with the effects of frailty and multimorbidity on outcomes such as postoperative morbidity. 13 Although normally DAGs have not been able to represent such interactions, Attia and colleagues 14 have proposed introduction of a node to represent the interaction between two exposures ( Fig 3 ). The interaction node allows us to represent the relationships between frailty, multimorbidity, and their relationships with other nodes in the DAG. Step 4: map the structural template of the graph The next step is mapping, where all variables influencing the exposure–outcome relationship are recorded. During mapping, these nodes are added to the graph, with edges drawn between every variable, saturating the graph. Step 5: refine the template graph to include only causal relationships Starting from a fully saturated graph, edges are removed when there is no known or suspected association between two nodes, taking into account the temporal order of variables. The remaining edges should be correctly directed to reflect causality and must not form any cycles. In this example, frailty was measured after operation and might cause postoperative morbidity, but not the other way around. The absence of an edge in a DAG is a strong indication that there is no direct relationship between two variables, whereas the presence of an edge indicates a possible causal link. This makes the absence of an edge integral to specifying which relationships are not present. To aid transparency, existing evidence and expert opinions can be summarised in a table; our summary is given in Supplementary Table S1 . When modelling the relationship between frailty and multimorbidity and postoperative morbidity, some relationships are apparent. For example, increasing operative severity results in increased postoperative morbidity. Other relationships are less obvious and require a literature search for confirmation, such as the relationship between malignancy and delirium. To minimise the likelihood of a real relationship between variables being missed or misrepresented, a counterfactual thought experiment can be helpful. Imagine alternative scenarios where researchers assess what would happen if a particular variable were changed, whilst all other factors remain unchanged. Imagining the effect of the variable changing helps to evaluate the direct and indirect effects of variables in a DAG. For example, consider the relationship between age and dementia. The direction of this relationship is evident: if a patient gets older, then their risk of dementia increases, whilst the converse is not true: getting dementia does not change a patient's age. For a more complex example, consider the relationship between social deprivation and frailty. It is widely accepted that socioeconomic deprivation is associated with frailty, largely because of factors such as reduced access to healthcare and poorer lifestyle choices. However, it might not be clear which direction to assign to this relationship. In this case, the SNAP-3 team concluded that the overwhelming majority of the temporal relationship points to socioeconomic deprivation affecting the chance of living with frailty. As a result, we represented this relationship with a unidirectional arrow from socioeconomic deprivation to frailty in our DAGs. Step 6: integration of variables The nodes and edges should be integrated so that all relationships (edges) and all absences of relationships (absence of edges) are recorded in one DAG in the simplest possible form. Initially, the DAG depicted hearing and visual impairment as separate nodes; however, their edges were identical (with age, frailty, multimorbidity, dementia, and delirium), so for simplicity, they were combined. In the SNAP-3 study, these two variables were studied independently and so they will remain separate for the analysis model. Step 7: review and revision of the DAG The SNAP-3 DAGs were reviewed by an independent expert panel of anaesthetists, geriatricians, statisticians, and surgeons who made suggested changes to relationships. For the DAGs contained in the Supplementary information that include the outcome LOS, external reviewers recommended the inclusion of the unmeasured variable, ‘access to rehabilitation and social services’. Step 8: optimise study design At this stage, the DAG should be used to inform study design. The nodes depicted will represent what should be measured in the study in readiness for analysis. Researchers must carefully consider what each variable represents and how it can be most accurately measured, taking into account the constraints of practicality and funding. Measurement bias is a common issue in observational studies, particularly those that rely on routinely or retrospectively collected data. In SNAP-3, frailty was prospectively measured by local investigators using the CFS as part of the study protocol. The CFS was selected to minimise measurement bias, as it is extensively validated in the surgical population and familiar, relatively easy for our local investigators to use. On the other hand, multimorbidity, defined as the count of preexisting comorbidities, is more vulnerable to measurement bias. Local investigators were asked to record comorbidities from a predefined list and, if possible, to verify this information by questioning the participant and cross-referencing with patient notes. Despite these efforts, it is likely that some comorbidities were missed, which could lead to an underestimation of multimorbidity and measurement bias. Another potential source of measurement bias was the detection of postoperative morbidity. Because of limitations of resources, SNAP-3 asked local investigators to review participants for complications on days 3 and 7. It was assumed that participants did not have any complications if they were not still in hospital on day 3. As a result, some more minor complications might have been underestimated. In addition, potential source measurement bias might occur owing to the underrecognition of postoperative delirium, which is notoriously challenging to capture in both clinical and research settings. SNAP-3 chose to detect delirium prospectively using screening tools alongside retrospective notes review to maximise detection, avoiding overburdening local investigators. The node ‘genetic predisposition’, with arrows to frailty and multimorbidity, was beyond the scope of SNAP-3 to measure; therefore, this node is denoted in pale grey as ‘unobserved’ to aid discussion of study limitations. Step 9: identify confounding variables The DAG should be closely examined for nodes that influence both the exposure and the outcome (directly or indirectly) and are not on the causal pathway, as these are likely confounding variables. These are seen as nodes with arrows going towards the outcome and the exposure, either directly or indirectly ( Fig 2 c). When using DAGitty, the confounding nodes are identified as pink with red edges demonstrating that they are biasing paths (i.e. if not blocked, these paths would lead to a biased estimate of the causal effect). 4 , 9 The SNAP-3 DAG examining frailty and multimorbidity impact on postoperative morbidity has many confounding variables, including operative severity, urgency, and preoperative clinic review. Step 10: determine the adjustment set Some confounding variables are obvious, such as age, which clearly affects the likelihood of a person developing frailty and their likelihood of postoperative morbidity. Others are more subtle; for example, social deprivation directly increases the likelihood of developing frailty and indirectly influences postoperative morbidity through the mediator urgency. Identifying and adjusting for confounding variables are essential to isolate the causal effect of the exposure on the outcome, thereby preventing spurious associations and confounding bias. DAGitty can help with this process by offering suggestions for a minimum adjustment set. DAGitty allows nodes to be marked as ‘adjusted for’ by changing their background colour to white; this action also changes the edge colour from red to black, indicating that the biasing path no longer exists. 4 , 9 It is important to adjust for the minimum possible number of nodes to isolate the effect of the exposure on the outcome ( Fig 3 ). There might be several possible minimum adjustment sets; choosing which one to move forward is subjective and might be based on degree of missing data, data quality, or other considerations such as the number of parameters in the model. If, despite these steps, there remains uncertainty regarding the most representative DAG and the best possible adjustment set, it might be useful to prespecify a sensitivity analysis that compares the alternative models. By outlining the need for a sensitivity analysis, incorporating different DAGs and their corresponding adjustment sets, researchers can strengthen the statistical robustness of their inferences during analysis. A sensitivity analysis allows for comparison of the outputs from the alternative models. If the results from these models are similar, it provides greater confidence that the DAGs both accurately represent the underlying exposure–outcome relationship. Conversely, if the results differ, it presents an opportunity to explore the complexities of the relationship further and generate new hypotheses and research questions. Step 11: statistical analysis The chosen minimum adjustment set should be used to develop the statistical model for the exposure–outcome relationship. SNAP-3 used the following multivariable regression model as a basis for the final model, to adjust for all confounding variables without introducing unintended mutual adjustments and biases. Postoperative morbidity (excluding delirium) ∼ frailty ∗ multimorbidity (with dementia, malignancy, hearing impairment, visual impairment removed) + age + dementia + hearing impairment + visual impairment + malignancy + sex + social deprivation. We note that it is not necessarily obvious from the DAG itself on how to model each variable within the statistical model. As such, researchers still need to make decisions about how to model variables. For example, we considered whether age was appropriately modelled or whether a more complicated relationship was plausible, for example, adding a quadratic term for age. Step 12: interpret the results When interpreting the results in the context of a DAG, the statistical model output helps to assess the relationship between the exposure and outcome with more confidence and present findings with greater transparency. Step 13: communicate the results When communicating results, it is helpful to publish the relevant DAG with an explanation of its assumptions and the decisions made, alongside a table describing the literature. Study limitations, such as unmeasurable or inaccurately recorded variables, should be reported. Such transparency helps ensure that an audience can fully understand and evaluate findings, offering feedback and refinements where necessary. This paper includes the DAGs used to inform the statistical modelling in SNAP-3 ( Fig 3 , Supplementary Figs. S1–S6 ). For some readers, it may be helpful to simplify the DAG by providing a schematic illustration of the assumptions made. An example of this, for Fig. 3 , is provided in Supplementary Figure S7 . Step 14: continue to refine the directed acyclic graphs SNAP-3 welcomes the suggestions of other researchers in further refining these proposed DAGs which can then be used in other studies. Expanding the use of directed acyclic graphs to more scenarios and addressing uncertainties Following the steps in Table 1 , a DAG was constructed for each exposure–outcome relationship of interest in the context of the SNAP-3 study, using perioperative literature and clinical knowledge of an expert panel of anaesthetists, geriatricians, and a surgeon. The rationale and evidence base for our decision-making regarding relationships are detailed in Supplementary Table S1 . Figure 3 and Supplementary Figures S1–S3 present DAGs for the relationships between the exposures frailty and multimorbidity, and each of the outcomes: postoperative morbidity, delirium, mortality, and LOS. Supplementary Figures S4–S6 present DAGs for the relationships between the exposure delirium and each of the outcomes, mortality, LOS, and postoperative morbidity. Although interactions are not traditionally represented in DAGs, in Supplementary Figures S4–S6 , we have included a node representing the interaction between frailty and multimorbidity for consistency with our decision to model the combined effect of frailty and multimorbidity on postoperative outcomes in Fig. 3 and Supplementary Figures S1–S3 . The process of developing a DAG requires explicit decision-making regarding the nature and direction of causal relationships between variables. This benefits study design by predetermining and justifying sensitivity analyses derived from plausible alternative DAGs, thus allowing for deeper investigation of the research question. DAGs prompt researchers to consider the roles of variables that are considered to be of clinical or epidemiological importance; it might not be obvious otherwise whether these variables act as confounding variables, mediators, effect modifiers, or other roles. Differing viewpoints on the likely roles of these controversial variables enables further analyses and discussion. For example, in Step 3, we explain our rationale for considering an interaction between frailty and multimorbidity. Furthermore, from Step 10, it is clear we are considering urgency as a mediator rather than a confounding variable; other researchers might have different perspectives. Discussion We have presented a brief overview of the theory of causal diagrams and our proposed synthesised framework ( Table 1 ) for understanding the associations between frailty, multimorbidity, and delirium with outcomes in older surgical patients. DAGs have added value to the SNAP-3 study by facilitating systematic consideration of causal pathways and their underpinning in theory and previous evidence. For example, if the DAG had not been constructed before creating the adjustment set for modelling the relationship between frailty, multimorbidity, and postoperative morbidity, it might have been incorrectly assumed that operative severity should be adjusted for ( Fig 3 ). However, the DAG demonstrated that adjusting for operative severity would actually open a biasing path, as operative severity is a mediator rather than a confounding variable. This highlights the importance of using DAGs to inform model adjustment and avoid introducing bias in the analysis. Previous reviews of the use of DAGs have found that there was ‘huge variation in practice’ and discordance with the ‘Evidence synthesis for constructing directed acyclic graphs’ (ESC-DAGs) guidance, resulting in oversimplification of research questions when translated into DAGs, altering of DAGs to fit available data, and lack of publications containing DAGs even when they were used to create a model. 9 , 10 , 15 ESC-DAG guidance emphasises three main points: firstly, that DAGs should be constructed from background knowledge; secondly, that having no connecting arrow between variables is a stronger assertion than having an arrow; and thirdly, that care must be taken to avoid introducing bias by overadjustment. 8 As described here, SNAP-3 followed best practice guidance to create a DAG that maximises the usefulness of observational cohort data. 8 The process of drafting and refining the DAGs, enriched by the contributions of external clinical experts, was a valuable inter-specialty educational experience. There were many discussions focused on the inclusion of nodes and placement of edges, with several key considerations highlighted here. Notably, some predisposing factors for delirium were excluded from the DAGs. For instance, abnormal temperature was omitted as it is closely associated to surgical urgency, and patients with hypothermia or hyperthermia almost exclusively undergo nonelective surgery. Similarly, several precipitants of delirium, such as infection, pain, hypoxia, acute kidney injury, catheter use, poor nutrition, constipation, hypotension, and other cardiopulmonary complications, were represented collectively within the postoperative complication node. In practice, most of these factors would have been mediators and so would not have changed the modelling assumptions made. For increased transparency and completeness, they could have been included in the DAGs. However, including these individual factors as separate nodes would not only complicate the DAGs (disregarding Step 6 of Table 1 ) but also risk double counting their impact (disregarding Step 3). We also debated the inclusion of hyponatraemia and hypernatraemia as they are so often associated with delirium, ultimately deciding against it. Abnormal sodium levels are very commonly associated with acute kidney injury, comorbidities (and so multimorbidity), and polypharmacy, so the impact of these conditions would already be modelled. Modelling the relationship between postoperative complications and delirium presents a unique challenge when constructing a DAG. The fundamental principle of DAGs is that they must be acyclic, meaning they cannot contain feedback loops or circular relationships ( Table 1 , Step 5). This poses a dilemma when the causal direction between two variables, such as postoperative complications and delirium, is ambiguous or potentially bidirectional. In clinical practice, postoperative complications such as pneumonia increase the risk of delirium through infection, inflammation, and hypoxaemia. Conversely, delirium might increase the likelihood of postoperative complications. For instance, a patient with delirium can be at higher risk of falling or developing pneumonia owing to impaired mobility, reduced adherence to postoperative care, or a lower level of consciousness. A DAG must assign a single direction of causality, but in these clinical scenarios, the relationships are often reciprocal. Delirium might both result from and contribute to postoperative complications, creating a feedback loop. In an ideal scenario, SNAP-3 would involve local investigators observing participants multiple times within a 24 h period to capture detailed data on the sequence of events, whether postoperative complications preceded delirium or vice versa . This level of observation would enable a more nuanced understanding of these relationships, providing clarity on the causal pathways and informing the development of a more accurate DAG. However, the realities of clinical research, including resource limitations and patient preference, do not allow for such intensive observation. As a compromise, we simplified the model by acknowledging the bidirectional nature of the relationship but choosing to represent the dominant causal direction, based on clinical evidence and experience, as postoperative complications causing delirium. This assumption of a unidirectional relationship reflects balance between theoretical rigour and practical feasibility, but it does mean that estimates of causal effects based on the DAGs are only strictly valid if the assumption holds. We encourage readers to consider this limitation when interpreting the results. The use of DAGs is not common in the perioperative literature. This could be a result of a lack of awareness or inexperience in creating DAGs. When searching for other recent studies in either frailty or perioperative medicine where DAGs had been used, we found only a few such examples, 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 one of which is a previous SNAP study. 22 Some helpful reviews have raised awareness in the field of perioperative medicine, but DAGs are not currently advocated by the STROBE checklist and so are not seen as a requirement in observational studies. 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 ESC-DAG guidance exists, but it is not widely adopted in perioperative research papers. Papers that included use of DAGs to inform their study design or analysis do not always include the DAG in the main content of the paper, instead including it in the supplementary information. Although this approach is often necessary for conciseness, the main disadvantage is that this does not maximise the benefits of producing DAG in terms of audience transparency and does not promote the use of DAGs as a useful tool in perioperative literature. There are limitations in the theory and application of DAGs. The absence of a relationship (edge) is a strong statement, but it is very hard to prove (in theory or practice) that relationships do not exist. Directionality of relationships may be speculative or unclear as discussed earlier. It is tempting to only include the easily measurable or known factors. Inevitably, DAGs become very complex very quickly and can be hard to interpret, notwithstanding that modern software makes their application to statistical model construction easier. The terminology used and the mathematical modelling in the creation of DAGs have the potential to discourage researchers from using them. Despite these limitations, we believe that not using this approach carries more risk, the most obvious being that a statistical model will remain confounded or be overadjusted, both leading to biased estimates of the causal effects of interest, and potentially to erroneous conclusions. We believe that publication of the DAGs for SNAP-3 has several benefits. At an individual study level, it provides a formal and evidence-based justification for the statistical choices made. Readers and researchers may or may not agree with these, but any critique can be based on an agreed starting point. At a specialty level, publication of DAGs brings the technique into the mainstream. We believe that an understanding of causal pathways is fundamental to interpretation of observational studies in perioperative medicine. More widely, the DAGs we have presented are a starting point for researchers in the frailty-perioperative care research domain. Another benefit of constructing and publishing DAGs is avoidance of the ‘Table Two Fallacy’, 27 which arises when multiple estimated effect measures from the same model are presented together in a table. This practice encourages readers to interpret all the estimates from the table in the same way. Typically, readers assume that each estimated effect represents the direct influence of the corresponding covariate on the outcome. However, what these estimates often depict is the influence of the covariate on the relationship between the exposure and the outcome. Constructing a clinically plausible causal inference diagram for each exposure–outcome relationship makes it clear exactly what exactly the relationship of interest is, and thus which estimate should be presented in results tables to minimise the risk of the ‘Table Two Fallacy’ so often seen in observational causal inference. 27 We note that, as DAGs are not widely used in perioperative research, the effective use of DAGs can be unfamiliar to many readers. We provide a list of suggested questions ( Table 2 ) to assess whether or not the DAG adds value to the paper. Conclusions SNAP-3 is an observational cohort study, and inferring causality, which is often of interest to readers, should be done with caution. Identifying the correct covariates to adjust for is essential to accurately describe causal relationships. Appropriately constructed DAGs provide a foundation for accurate modelling, allowing readers to support or refute these models. They are especially important in complex real-world scenarios, which are at risk of oversimplification or induced bias from incorrect adjustment sets, leading to inaccurate models and erroneous conclusions. SNAP-3 presents a DAG describing the relationship between frailty, multimorbidity, and postoperative multimorbidity as a starting point for discussion of the complexities of the DAG and the real-world scenario it represents. We hope that our use of DAGs and this practical explanation will encourage other epidemiological observational studies to optimise their ability to infer causality. Authors’ contributions Initiated the collaborative project, is a guarantor and grant holder, provided expertise in anaesthetics and perioperative medicine: IKM. Revised the draft manuscript: IKM, PM, JSLP. Co-drafted and revised the manuscript: CJS, HAB. Provided statistical expertise in study design: HAB, PM. Provided expertise in geriatric medicine: JSLP. Reviewed the final draft and contributed to revisions: all authors. Funding The Frances and Augustus Newman Foundation and the Royal College of Anaesthetists and the Frances and Augustus Newman Foundation. Neither funder had input into the design, conduct, or analysis of the study. National Institute for Health and Care Research ARC North Thames (to HAB). Declarations of interest IKM is the Director of the Centre for Research and Improvement at the Royal College of Anaesthetists. The other authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. Acknowledgements The success of SNAP-3 is largely credit to the enthusiasm and dedication of the clinicians and researchers based at our SNAP-3 sites. The majority of local investigators were resident anaesthetists, specialty and specialist doctors (SASs), and research nurses who have worked above and beyond their usual clinical duties to recruit and follow study patients ( Supplementary Table S2 ) The Principal Investigators (PIs), Associate Principal Investigators, and Trainee PIs have disseminated the protocol and coordinated their local teams to collect high-quality, accurate data for the study. The central SNAP-3 team are incredibly grateful to everyone who has contributed to SNAP-3. A list of all collaborators can be found in the Supplementary material. The SNAP-3 authors would also like to thank our public and patient representative, Carol Green, the Research and Audit Federation of Anaesthetic Trainees (RAFT), regional anaesthetist in training-led research networks, the steering committee, and the Royal College of Anaesthetists research team including Christine Taylor (Research Manager), Jose Lourtie (Head of Research), and Sharon Drake (Director of Clinical Quality and Research). We are grateful to all the patients and their families who participated in this study, without whom SNAP-3 would not have been possible. This report is independent research supported by the National Institute for Health and Care Research ARC North Thames. The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Institute for Health and Care Research or the Department of Health and Social Care. Handling Editor: Hugh C Hemmings Jr Footnotes Appendix A Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bja.2025.04.027 . Appendix A. Supplementary data The following are the Supplementary data to this article. Multimedia component 1 Multimedia component 1 Multimedia component 2 Multimedia component 2 References 1. Swarbrick C.J., Williams K., Evans B., et al. Characteristics of older patients undergoing surgery in the UK: SNAP-3, a snapshot observational study. Br J Anaesth. 2025;134:328–340. doi: 10.1016/j.bja.2024.11.024. 2. Hernan M.A., Robins J.M. Causal inference: what if. CRC Press; Boca Raton, FL, USA: 2024. 3. Digitale J.C., Martin J.N., Glymour M.M. Tutorial on directed acyclic graphs. J Clin Epidemiol. 2022;142:264–267. doi: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2021.08.001. 4. Textor J. Radboud University; 2023. Drawing and Analyzing causal DAGs with DAGitty. Nijmegen, The Netherlands: data science Group. 5. Textor J., van der Zander B., Gilthorpe M., Liskiewicz M., Ellison G. Robust causal inference using directed acyclic graphs: the R package ‘dagitty’. Int J Epidemiol. 2016;45:1887–1894. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyw341. 6. Tennant P.W.G., Murray E.J., Arnold K.F., et al. Use of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) to identify confounders in applied health research: review and recommendations. Int J Epidemiol. 2021;50:620–632. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyaa213. 7. Gaskell A.L., Sleigh J.W. An introduction to causal diagrams for anesthesiology research. Anesthesiology. 2020;132:951–967. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000003193. 8. Ferguson K.D., McCann M., Katikireddi S.V., et al. Evidence synthesis for constructing directed acyclic graphs (ESC-DAGs): a novel and systematic method for building directed acyclic graphs. Int J Epidemiol. 2019;49:322–329. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyz150. 9. Textor J., Hardt J., Knüppel S. DAGitty: a graphical tool for analyzing causal diagrams. Epidemiology. 2011;22:745. doi: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e318225c2be. 10. Watson M.L., Hickman S.H.M., Dreesbeimdiek K.M., Kohler K., Stubbs D.J. Directed acyclic graphs in perioperative observational research – a systematic review and critique against best practice recommendations. PLoS One. 2023;18 doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0281259. 11. Williamson E.J., Aitken Z., Lawrie J., Dharmage S.C., Burgess J.A., Forbes A.B. Introduction to causal diagrams for confounder selection. Respirology. 2014;19:303–311. doi: 10.1111/resp.12238. 12. Hernán M.A., Wang W., Leaf D.E. Target trial emulation: a framework for causal inference from observational data. JAMA. 2022;328:2446–2447. doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.21383. 13. Vetrano D.L., Palmer K., Marengoni A., et al. Frailty and multimorbidity: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2019;74:659–666. doi: 10.1093/gerona/gly110. 14. Attia J., Holliday E., Oldmeadow C. A proposal for capturing interaction and effect modification using DAGs. Int J Epidemiol. 2022;51:1047–1053. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyac126. 15. Tennant P., Textor J., Gilthorpe M., Ellison G. OP87 dagitty and directed acyclic graphs in observational research: a critical review. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2017;71:A43. 16. Zheng C., Zhang Y., Cao J., Jing X., Li H. Survival benefits of perioperative chemoradiotherapy versus chemotherapy for advanced stage gastric cancer based on directed acyclic graphs. PLoS One. 2023;18 doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0283854. 17. Lam S., Kumar B., Loke Y.K., Orme S.E., Dhatariya K. Glycated haemoglobin and the risk of postoperative complications in people without diabetes: a prospective population-based study in UK Biobank. Anaesthesia. 2022;77:659–667. doi: 10.1111/anae.15684. 18. Ferrando C., Librero J., Tusman G., et al. Intraoperative open lung condition and postoperative pulmonary complications. A secondary analysis of iPROVE and iPROVE-O2 trials. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2022;66:30–39. doi: 10.1111/aas.13979. 19. Steele K.M., Schwartz M.H. Causal effects of motor control on gait kinematics after orthopedic surgery in cerebral palsy: a machine-learning approach. Front Hum Neurosci. 2022;16 doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2022.846205. 20. Cagigas Fernández C., Palazuelos C., Cristobal Poch L., Gomez Ruiz M. A probabilistic model for the prediction of intra-abdominal infection after colorectal surgery. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2021;36:2481–2488. doi: 10.1007/s00384-021-03955-1. 21. Pollmann C.T., Dahl F.A., Røtterud J.H.M., Gjertsen J.E., Årøen A. Surgical site infection after hip fracture – mortality and risk factors: an observational cohort study of 1,709 patients. Acta Orthop. 2020;91:347–352. doi: 10.1080/17453674.2020.1717841. 22. Campbell R.A.S., Thevathasan T., Wong D.J.N., et al. Critical care unit bed availability and postoperative outcomes: a multinational cohort study. Anaesthesia. 2024;79:1165–1179. doi: 10.1111/anae.16383. 23. Krishnamoorthy V., Wong D.J.N., Wilson M., et al. Causal inference in perioperative medicine observational research: part 1, a graphical introduction. Br J Anaesth. 2020;125:393–397. doi: 10.1016/j.bja.2020.03.031. 24. Gongola A., Bradshaw J.C. Directed acyclic graphs in surgical research. J Surg Res. 2023;282:285–288. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2022.07.017. 25. Shapiro D.D., Msaouel P. Causal diagram techniques for urologic oncology research. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2021;19:271.e1–271.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.clgc.2020.08.003. 26. von Elm E., Altman D.G., Egger M., Pocock S.J., Gøtzsche P.C., Vandenbroucke J.P. STROBE Initiative.The Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE)statement: guidelines for reporting observational studies. J Clin Epidemiol. 2008 Apr;61(4):344–349. doi: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2007.11.008. PMID: 18313558. 27. Westreich D., Greenland S. The table 2 fallacy: presenting and interpreting confounder and modifier coefficients. Am J Epidemiol. 2013;177:292–298. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws412. 28. Swarbrick C., SNAP-3 collaborators Postoperative outcomes in older patients living with frailty and multimorbidity in the UK: SNAP-3, a snapshot observational study. BJA. 2025 doi: 10.1016/j.bja.2025.04.026. Associated Data Supplementary Materials Multimedia component 1 Multimedia component 1 Multimedia component 2 Multimedia component 2