379 blackwellopen Suicide &amp; Life-Threatening Behavior Suicide Life Threat Behav PMC11716346 11716346 11716346 39400437 10.1111/sltb.13132 Sertraline medications plus dialectical behavior therapy for depressed adolescents with nonsuicidal self‐injury behaviors Liu Chaoqun B.S. 1 Ye Xinwu B.S. 1 Chen Minshan B.S. 1 ✉ 1 Psychiatry, Wenzhou Seventh People's Hospital, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China * Correspondence , Minshan Chen, Psychiatry, Wenzhou Seventh People's Hospital, No. 552 Xishan East Road, Ouhai District, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, China. Email: chenminshan2024@163.com ✉ Corresponding author. 14 10 2024 55 1 e13132 e13132 10 1 2025 © 2024 The Author(s). Suicide and Life‐Threatening Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Association of Suicidology. This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes. Abstract Objective The study aims to investigate the efficacy of sertraline medication plus dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) in reducing nonsuicidal self‐injury (NSSI) behavior and depression among adolescents. Methods Participants were 100 adolescents with depression and NSSI behaviors, 50 of whom received sertraline medication plus DBT and 50 of whom received sertraline medication plus cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for 12 weeks. Results During 6 months post intervention, 26 (57.8%) participants did not report having engaged in any form of NSSI in the sertraline + DBT group and 15 (32.6%) in the sertraline + CBT group, showing significant difference. The sertraline + DBT group and the sertraline + CBT group exhibited significant difference regarding the proportions of cutting skin and biting self. The scores of anxiety, depression, aggression against self in four modified overt aggression scale categories, and Personal and Social Performance were notably lower in the sertraline + DBT group than those in the sertraline + CBT group at 6 months post intervention. Conclusion Sertraline medication plus DBT could decrease NSSI episodes and improve symptoms of anxiety and depression for adolescents, and these changes were comparable to those of CBT. More importantly, DBT was demonstrated better clinical improvements at 6‐month follow‐up. Keywords: adolescent, cognitive behavioral therapy, depression, dialectical behavior therapy, nonsuicidal self‐injury, sertraline status released display-pdf yes is-in-collection-domain yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Revised 2024 Sep 14; Received 2024 Jun 26; Accepted 2024 Oct 2; Issue date 2025 Feb. INTRODUCTION Depression is a prevalent mood and psychiatric disorder across all socioeconomic groups and geographic regions worldwide, with a particularly rapid increase in prevalence among adolescents over the past three decades (Stecher et al., 2023 ). Non‐suicidal self‐injury (NSSI) behaviors have become alarming public health problems among adolescents with depression (Lin et al., 2018 ). A history of NSSI has been deemed as a significant predictor of future suicide attempts in depressed youths (Niu et al., 2023 ), non‐pharmacological approaches such as psychotherapy may require a combination with antidepressants to alleviate the risk of subsequent suicide attempts and restore function (Bolton et al., 2015 ). Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are a modestly effective and generally safe pharmacological treatment for adolescent patients with major depression, but their use needs periodic monitoring to evaluate benefit–risk ratio (Thom et al., 2021 ). The results do not suggest that treatment with SSRIs may contribute to an increased risk of suicidal behavior in youths; rather, it may decline the risk (Lagerberg et al., 2022 ). For example, The overall suicidality was declined and the proportion of suicide attempts was stable in the weeks after SSRI initiation (Sorensen et al., 2022 ). SSRI use for a week significantly reduced impulsivity in self‐report scales assessing state impulsivity among youths with major depression (Ogut &amp; Sezer, 2024 ). Fluoxetine, sertraline, and escitalopram all belonging to SSRIs have been reported to yield modest improvements (about 5%–10%) in standardized depression scores without adding the risk of suicidal behavior or ideation in adolescent patients with major depression (DeLucia et al., 2016 ). A positive benefit‐to‐risk ratio was reported for sertraline in adolescents with major depression (March et al., 2006 ). Although sertraline fails to improve depressive symptoms within 6 weeks in primary care, patients show improvements in anxiety, quality of life, and self‐rated mental health (Lewis et al., 2019 ). Previously, sertraline combined with repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation were has proven to enhance cognitive function in depressed patients exhibiting NSSI behavior (Liu et al., 2024 ). For adolescents with moderate to severe depression, a newly revised expert guideline advocates psychotherapy with the option of adding fluoxetine with sertraline and citalopram as alternatives (He et al., 2023 ; Hopkins et al., 2015 ). Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) prioritizes suicidal behavior and other self‐directed violence as the primary treatment targets, which has come to be a commonly practiced psychotherapy showing promising results, specifically in reducing suicidal ideation and NSSI among adolescents struggling with depressive disorder (Asarnow et al., 2021 ; Cook &amp; Gorraiz, 2016 ). Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) appears to be possibly effective for clinically depressed children, with mixed findings across trials (Smarason et al., 2024 ). The efficacy data after DBT were broadly comparable to those of CBT in individuals with binge eating disorder, but there was a trend toward relapse in CBT at 6‐month follow‐up (Lammers et al., 2022 ). A previous study also found the addition of fluoxetine to CBT did not demonstrate a better improvement in depressive symptoms for young people with moderate‐to‐severe depression, indicating more attempts for different antidepressants plus different psychotherapies (Davey et al., 2019 ). A combination of sertraline and CBT showed a superior response rate in reducing the severity of anxiety in children with anxiety disorders (Walkup et al., 2008 ; Wang et al., 2017 ). However, DBT has been reported having comparable costs and mortality but higher quality of life than CBT (Acolin, 2022 ). Emotion regulation may be relevant to disturbances observed in neurobiological systems involving engagement of limbic brain regions and frontal regulatory brain regions and disturbances in serotonin and physiological response systems (Liu et al., 2018 ). Treatment with SSRIs may be most beneficial in conjunction with DBT to handle safety, develop self‐soothing strategies to improve emotion regulation, as well as reduce interpersonal sensitivity (Cullen et al., 2013 ). Considering no significant differences noted in efficacy and tolerability of fluoxetine and sertraline during the acute treatment of major depression (Fava et al., 2000 ), the efficacy data from sertraline medication rather than fluoxetine plus either DBT or CBT are likely to be clinically important for depressed adolescents with NSSI episodes. In this study, we compared the effectiveness of combined treatment with sertraline and DBT or CBT in reducing NSSI and improving depressive symptoms for adolescents. METHODS Participant selection, recruitment, and enrollment This study prospectively recruited adolescents with depressive disorder between January 2023 and June 2023 through the hospital emergency department, inpatient and outpatient services. Inclusion criteria were as follows: the diagnosis of D‐NSSI was confirmed by two fully certified consultant psychiatrists according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM‐5) (Morey et al., 2013 ) and the results of the Mini‐International Neuropsychiatric Interview (Sheehan et al., 1998 ), a history of at least two episodes of NSSI behaviors, at least one within the last 16 weeks, and age of 12–18 years. Exclusion criteria were as follows: IQ &lt;70 on the Kauffman Brief Intelligence Test (Anbar et al., 2024 ), primary problem of psychosis, mania, anorexia, or life‐threatening condition, receiving antipsychotic medications or mood‐stabilizing medications for at least 2 weeks, previous treatment with sertraline that was either ineffective or poorly tolerated, and adolescents or parent without Chinese fluency. Parents and legal guardians gave written informed consent. All procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee of our hospital. Treatment conditions Participants were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive sertraline medication concurrently plus DBT or sertraline medication concurrently plus CBT using a random number table. All participants received one sertraline capsule (50 mg) daily for 1 week then two capsules daily for up to 11 weeks (Lewis et al., 2019 ). Adherence behavior to sertraline medication was evaluated with the Tablet Routines Questionnaire (TRQ) and confirmed by pill counts at any of the 4‐weekly visits during the 12‐week treatment window (Sajatovic et al., 2012 ; Sylvia et al., 2014 ). Poor medication adherence was defined as missing at least 30% of their medications in the past week at their baseline visit. DBT, delivered for 12 weeks, including weekly individual psychotherapy (60 min), weekly multifamily skills training (120 min), brief (generally about 10 min) youth and parent telephone coaching focused on skill use/crisis support, family therapy sessions, and therapist team consultation as needed (McCauley et al., 2018 ). Because adolescent DBT focuses on increasing validation in parent‐teen interactions, parents were seen individually in the first session. DBT consists of a series of topics: mindfulness skills, emotion regulation, interpersonal effectiveness, and management of acute crises. CBT is also a manualized group intervention structured by seven core modules consisting of psychoeducation, emotional recognition, behavioral activation, the ABC model and chain analysis, identifying automatic thoughts, thought challenging and substituting, improving social skills, and relapse prevention (Davey et al., 2019 ). Participants received CBT delivered by therapists in weekly 50‐min session over a duration of 12 weeks. Adherence to psychotherapy was measured by attendance at therapy sessions and by self‐reports at any of the 4‐weekly visits during the 12‐week treatment window (Lopez‐Pinar et al., 2024 ). Poor adherence to psychotherapy was defined as rating psychotherapy as ineffective and missing ≥consecutively two sessions or three sessions in total. Measures Deliberate self‐harm inventory‐youth version The deliberate self‐harm inventory‐youth version (DSHI‐Y) is a modified version of the Deliberate Self‐Harm Inventory (DSHI) that evaluates the presence and frequency of six NSSI behavior items involving cutting, self‐burning, severe scratching, self‐biting, banging (head‐banging and the banging of other body parts), and self‐punching (Gratz et al., 2012 ). Each item is rated on a 5‐point Likert scale ranging from 1 indicating “I have never done this,” 2 indicating “Yes, one time,” 3 indicating “Yes, two to five times,” 4 indicating “Yes, six to ten times,” and 5 indicating “Yes, more than 10 times.” The Cronbach's alpha value was 0.83. Occasional NSSI participants were those who reported engaging in five or fewer NSSI incidents and frequent NSSI participants who reported engaging in more than five NSSI incidents. Zung's self‐rating anxiety scale and self‐rating depression scale The Chinese versions of the Zung's self‐rating anxiety scale (SAS) and self‐rating depression scale (SDS) were employed to intuitively reflect respondents' subjective feelings regarding anxiety symptoms and depressive disorders for nearly 1 week. The SAS and the SDS both have 20 items and each item is a four‐point Likert type scale: 1 = never or very infrequently, 2 = some of the time, 3 = good part of the time, and 4 = most or all of the time. The raw scores range from 20 to 80 and was transformed to a standardized total score ranged from 25 to 100. Higher scores indicate more obvious anxiety and depression. A score ≥50 represents a reasonable cut‐off point to identify cases of anxiety and depression. The SAS and SDS exhibited good internal consistency (Cronbach α = 0.827 and Cronbach α = 0.898). Modified overt aggression scale The modified overt aggression scale (MOAS) is a 5‐point Likert scale from 0 to 4 and has four aggression categories involving verbal aggression, aggression against objects, aggression against self, and aggression against others (Huang et al., 2009 ). The sum of the four categories is the total MOAS score, and higher scores indicate severer aggressive behaviors. The Chinese version of the MOAS exhibited a good internal consistency with Cronbach α = 0.94. Personal and social performance scale The Chinese versions of the Personal and social performance (PSP‐CHN) was applied to assess the personal and social functioning of participants in the domains of socially useful activities (for example, work and study), personal and social relationships, self‐care, and disturbing and aggressive behaviors (Qiao et al., 2017 ). The PSP‐CHN exhibited good internal consistency (Cronbach α = 0.839). Outcomes Our primary outcome was change in the frequency of NSSI episodes at 6 months post intervention. Our secondary outcomes were the scores of SDS, SAS, MOAS, and PSP post intervention and at 6 months post intervention. Statistical analysis The obtained data were statistically processed using IBM SPSS Statistics 27.0 for Windows (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). A p ‐value of &lt;0.05 (two tailed) was used to denote significant difference. The result of randomization was checked by analyzing demographic and clinical variables at baseline between sertraline + DBT group and sertraline + CBT, using either the independent t ‐test or Mann–Whitney test. Quantitative data normally distributed are presented as a mean value with a standard deviation (SD) and analyzed by using the independent t ‐test. Those without normal distribution are presented as median (IQR) and analyzed by the Mann–Whitney test. Count data are presented as a total number with percentages (%) and analyzed by using the chi‐squared tests. Intent‐to‐treat analyses were performed to aid in data interpretation by including all participants who started treatment but dropped out. If patients miss measurements, this will be dealt with multiple imputation for missing outcome measures using all baseline patient characteristics and outcomes at all time points to generate five imputed data sets. The data set with the highest Cronbach's α value was selected for data analysis. A two‐way univariate analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was performed for post‐treatment and follow‐up results to assess the main and interaction effects, with the baseline values as covariates. Standardized effect sizes of the treatment were calculated by dividing the mean difference in symptom scores from pre‐to post treatment with the pooled SD of the respective measure, and reported as Cohen's d . The G*power software (version 3.1.9.2) assuming at least difference of 10% between means of the two independent groups with α = 0.05 and power = 0.9 gave a need of about 50 participants in each group. RESULTS Overall sample description We enrolled 100 participants eligible for planned recruitment between January 2023 and June 2023. Fifty percentage of participants ( n = 50) were randomly assigned to the sertraline + DBT group and 50% of participants ( n = 50) to the sertraline + CBT. Demographic and clinical characteristic of these participants are presented in Table 1 . In the sertraline + DBT group, three discontinued their trial treatment due to poor adherence to DBT intervention ( n = 1), moving away ( n = 1), and poor medication adherence ( n = 1). In the sertraline + CBT group, two discontinued their trial treatment due to poor adherence to CBT intervention ( n = 1) and poor medication adherence ( n = 1). Thus, there were 47 (94.0%) participants completing the first post‐baseline assessment in the sertraline + DBT group and 48 (96.0%) participants in the sertraline + CBT. In the sertraline + DBT group, two participants were lost to follow‐up. In the sertraline + CBT group, one was lost to follow‐up and one exhibited poor medication adherence. There were 45 (90.0%) participants completing the second post‐baseline assessment (6 months post intervention) in the sertraline + DBT group and 46 (92.0%) participants in the sertraline + CBT (Figure 1 ). NSSI and suicidal thought/behavior outcomes There were 6 (13.3%) frequent NSSI participants in the sertraline + DBT group and 8 (17.4%) frequent NSSI participants in the sertraline + CBT before intervention. Six months post intervention, there were 2 (4.4%) frequent NSSI participants in the sertraline + DBT group and 5 (10.9%) frequent NSSI participants in the sertraline + CBT group, showing no significant difference ( p &gt; 0.05). During 6 months post intervention, 26 (57.8%) participants did not report having engaged in any form of NSSI in the sertraline + DBT group and 15 (32.6%) in the sertraline + CBT group, showing significant difference ( p = 0.016). The forms of NSSI of participants at baseline and 6 months post intervention in the sertraline + DBT group and the sertraline + CBT group are listed in Table 2 . Two groups did not differ in the forms of NSSI at baseline ( p &gt; 0.05). Six months post intervention, the sertraline + DBT group and the sertraline + CBT group exhibited significant difference regarding the proportions of cutting skin ( p = 0.023) and biting self ( p = 0.027). With regard to suicidal thought/behavior, only a patient showing a NSSI behavior of banging head had suicidal thoughts twice from post intervention to 6 months post intervention in the sertraline + CBT group. SDS and SAS score outcomes The mean values of SDS scores at baseline, post intervention, and 6 months post intervention were 70.3, 50.7, and 54.1 in the sertraline +DBT group, 71.1, 53.4, and 61.9 in the sertraline + CBT group, respectively. The ANCOVA suggested an interaction between group and time (F time×group = 13.7, p &lt; 0.001, Figure 2a and Table 3 ). Further analyses revealed a lower SDS score in the sertraline +DBT group than in the sertraline + CBT group at 6 months post intervention ( p &lt; 0.001; mean difference: −7.88; 95% CI: −10.81 to −4.96; cohen's d : 1.08). The mean values of SAS scores at baseline, post intervention, and 6 months post intervention were in the sertraline +DBT group, in the sertraline + CBT group, respectively. The ANCOVA suggested an interaction between group and time (F time×group = 14.5, p &lt; 0.001, Figure 2b and Table 3 ). Further analyses revealed lower SAS scores in the sertraline +DBT group than in the sertraline + CBT group post intervention ( p = 0.022; mean difference: −2.31; 95% CI: −4.28 to −0.34; cohen's d : 0.41) and at 6 months post intervention ( p &lt; 0.001; mean difference: −7.34; 95% CI: −9.68 to −5.00; cohen's d : 1.11). MOAS and PSP score outcomes The changes of MOAS and PSP scores from baseline to post intervention and 6 months post intervention in the sertraline +DBT group and sertraline + CBT group are presented. The ANCOVA of three domains, verbal aggression, aggression against objects, and aggression against others, of the MOAS did not reveal an interaction between group and time ( p &gt; 0.05), and thus no further analysis performed. The ANCOVA of the MOAS domain aggression against self indicated an interaction between group and time (F time×group = 8.22, p = 0.005; Figure 2c and Table 4 ). Further analyses revealed lower scores of aggression against self in the sertraline +DBT group than in the sertraline + CBT group at 6 months post intervention ( p &lt; 0.001; mean difference: −0.82; 95% CI: −1.15 to −0.49; cohen's d : 1.00). The ANCOVA of the PSP scores showed an interaction between group and time (F time×group = 7.28, p = 0.008; Figure 2d and Table 4 ). Further analyses revealed lower PSP scores in the sertraline +DBT group than in the sertraline + CBT group post intervention ( p = 0.002; mean difference: −3.10; 95% CI: −5.06 to −1.15; cohen's d : 0.53) and at 6 months post intervention ( p &lt; 0.001; mean difference: −6.87; 95% CI: −8.98 to −4.77; cohen's d : 1.00). DISCUSSION In our primary analysis, we found evidence that sertraline medication plus DBT resulted in a greater reduction in the frequency of NSSI compared with sertraline medication plus CBT at 6 weeks after intervention for depressed adolescents with NSSI behaviors. In our secondary analyses, we found that sertraline medication plus DBT reduced depressive and anxiety symptoms, alleviated aggression against self, with a better improvement in PSP compared with sertraline medication plus CBT at 6 weeks after intervention for depressed adolescents with NSSI behaviors. Rathus and Miller, ( 2002 ) first reported a modified DBT for adolescents with suicidal attempts, which simplified the skills, incorporated family members, and reduced the length of treatment from 1 year to 12 weeks, compared to the adult protocol. There continues to be increasing evidence for the efficacy of modified applications of DBT to reduce NSSI among adolescents. McCauley et al. ( 2018 ) yielded positive efficacy data for DBT in reducing self‐harm and suicide attempts in highly suicidal self‐harming adolescents, and their results supported DBT as the first well‐established treatment for decreasing self‐harm in adolescents. Asarnow et al. ( 2021 ) demonstrated the significance of DBT on emotion regulation as a treatment target for reducing self‐harm, and they found 49.3% of youths achieved self‐harm remission by DBT during follow‐up. Psychotherapy for adolescents is qualitatively different from psychotherapy for adults, and DBT and CBT are two types of psychotherapy commonly applied in treating adolescents with a focus on anxiety disorders and depressive disorders (Katz et al., 2009 ). Of note, Afshari et al. ( 2022 ) found that CBT could significantly reduce depression and anxiety symptoms, but DBT seemed to be more effective for improving executive function. Adolescents with better executive function may explained the results in our study that sertraline medication plus DBT resulted in a greater reduction in the frequency of NSSI as well as depression and anxiety symptoms compared with sertraline medication plus CBT during the 6‐month follow‐up. Concurring with our efficacy data, Lammers et al. ( 2022 ) demonstrated a relapse in CBT but not in DBT at 6‐month follow‐up. Lin et al. ( 2019 ) recruited 82 depressed college students with a suicidal history who received either DBT or CBT and demonstrated both psychotherapies had similar reductions in depressive symptoms and suicide reattempts after the intervention and 6‐month follow‐up. They also found CBT conferred improvements in cognitive errors and DBT led to increases in acceptance. Acceptance and commitment therapy has shown to provide significant emotion regulation of adolescents with NSSI, as well as improve psychological flexibility (Yuan et al., 2024 ). Currently, DBT has been found to be studied for its effectiveness on reducing suicidal ideation, but more work is required to target NSSI ideation. In addition to structured psychotherapeutic approaches focusing on collaborative therapeutic relationships and motivation for change to reduce NSSI among depressed adolescents, medications targeting depressive symptoms also have demonstrated some benefits (Turner et al., 2014 ). Fluoxetine and sertraline, both being SSRI, are the first‐line treatment for depression in children and adolescents (DeFilippis &amp; Wagner, 2014 ). The superiority of SSRI plus CBT for youth with depression and anxiety has been supported (Strawn et al., 2022 ). However, the addition of fluoxetine to CBT did not demonstrate a better improvement in depressive symptoms for young people with moderate‐to‐severe depression in another study (Davey et al., 2019 ). Sertraline is likely to result in improvements in anxiety, quality of life, and self‐rated mental health in primary care, which are likely to be clinically important (Lewis et al., 2019 ). As demonstrated by our results, better improvements conferred by sertraline plus DBT on NSSI and depression compared with sertraline plus CBT. This study has several limitations. First, the sample size was not as large as planned recruitment due to potential participants deciding to not take medication or already taking medication. Second, only 6‐month follow‐up data were obtained. Considering greater NSSI frequency to a threshold increases risk for later suicide thoughts and attempts, a longer follow‐up, such as 12 months after intervention is warranted. Third, the single‐center nature and Chinese‐based population limited the generalizability to other patient populations around the world. In conclusion, the results from the present study show sertraline medication plus DBT could decrease NSSI episodes and improve depressive symptoms for adolescents, and these changes were comparable to those of CBT. More importantly, DBT was demonstrated better clinical improvements at 6‐month follow‐up. Therefore, DBT plus sertraline can be considered a candidate for psychological and pharmacological interventions among depressed adolescents with NSSI behaviors in clinical practice. FUNDING INFORMATION The study was supported by the Basic Scientific Research Projects in Wenzhou (no. Y20220832). CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors declare no conflict of interest. Liu, C. , Ye, X. , &amp; Chen, M. (2025). Sertraline medications plus dialectical behavior therapy for depressed adolescents with nonsuicidal self‐injury behaviors. Suicide and Life‐Threatening Behavior, 55, e13132. 10.1111/sltb.13132 DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The data used for the study are available in the present study. REFERENCES Acolin, J. (2022). Economic evaluation of dialectical behavioral therapy versus cognitive behavioral therapy for suicide prevention. The Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 25, 123–131. Afshari, B. , Jafarian Dehkordi, F. , Asgharnejad Farid, A. A. , Aramfar, B. , Balagabri, Z. , Mohebi, M. , Mardi, N. , &amp; Amiri, P. (2022). Study of the effects of cognitive behavioral therapy versus dialectical behavior therapy on executive function and reduction of symptoms in generalized anxiety disorder. Trends in Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 44, e20200156. Anbar, J. , Metoyer, M. , Smith, C. J. , &amp; Matthews, N. L. (2024). An exploration of online and in‐person Administration of the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, second edition (KBIT‐2) in children and adolescents being evaluated for autism Spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 10.1007/s10803-024-06323-4. Online ahead of print Asarnow, J. R. , Berk, M. S. , Bedics, J. , Adrian, M. , Gallop, R. , Cohen, J. , Korslund, K. , Hughes, J. , Avina, C. , Linehan, M. M. , &amp; McCauley, E. (2021). Dialectical behavior therapy for suicidal self‐harming youth: Emotion regulation, mechanisms, and mediators. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 60, 1105–1115.e4. Bolton, J. M. , Gunnell, D. , &amp; Turecki, G. (2015). Suicide risk assessment and intervention in people with mental illness. BMJ, 351, h4978. Cook, N. E. , &amp; Gorraiz, M. (2016). Dialectical behavior therapy for nonsuicidal self‐injury and depression among adolescents: Preliminary meta‐analytic evidence. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 21, 81–89. Cullen, K. R. , Westlund, M. K. , LaRiviere, L. L. , &amp; Klimes‐Dougan, B. (2013). An adolescent with nonsuicidal self‐injury: A case and discussion of neurobiological research on emotion regulation. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 828–831. Davey, C. G. , Chanen, A. M. , Hetrick, S. E. , Cotton, S. M. , Ratheesh, A. , Amminger, G. P. , Koutsogiannis, J. , Phelan, M. , Mullen, E. , Harrison, B. J. , Rice, S. , Parker, A. G. , Dean, O. M. , Weller, A. , Kerr, M. , Quinn, A. L. , Catania, L. , Kazantzis, N. , McGorry, P. D. , &amp; Berk, M. (2019). The addition of fluoxetine to cognitive behavioural therapy for youth depression (YoDA‐C): A randomised, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled, multicentre clinical trial. Lancet Psychiatry, 6, 735–744. DeFilippis, M. , &amp; Wagner, K. D. (2014). Management of treatment‐resistant depression in children and adolescents. Paediatric Drugs, 16, 353–361. DeLucia, V. , Kelsberg, G. , &amp; Safranek, S. (2016). Which SSRIs most effectively treat depression in adolescents? The Journal of Family Practice, 65, 632–634. Fava, M. , Rosenbaum, J. F. , Hoog, S. L. , Tepner, R. G. , Kopp, J. B. , &amp; Nilsson, M. E. (2000). Fluoxetine versus sertraline and paroxetine in major depression: Tolerability and efficacy in anxious depression. Journal of Affective Disorders, 59, 119–126. Gratz, K. L. , Latzman, R. D. , Young, J. , Heiden, L. J. , Damon, J. , Hight, T. , &amp; Tull, M. T. (2012). Deliberate self‐harm among underserved adolescents: The moderating roles of gender, race, and school‐level and association with borderline personality features. Personal Disorder, 3, 39–54. He, Y. , Gan, X. , Li, X. , Wang, T. , Li, J. , Lei, T. , Huang, Y. , Liu, R. , Chen, F. , Teng, T. , Xie, Y. , Ouyang, X. , &amp; Zhou, X. (2023). Sequenced treatment alternatives to relieve adolescent depression (STAR‐AD): A multicentre open‐label randomized controlled trial protocol. BMC Psychiatry, 23, 789. Hopkins, K. , Crosland, P. , Elliott, N. , Bewley, S. , &amp; Clinical Guidelines Update Committee . (2015). Diagnosis and management of depression in children and young people: Summary of updated NICE guidance. BMJ, 350, h824. Huang, H. C. , Wang, Y. T. , Chen, K. C. , Yeh, T. L. , Lee, I. H. , Chen, P. S. , Yang, Y. K. , &amp; Lu, R. B. (2009). The reliability and validity of the Chinese version of the modified overt aggression scale. International Journal of Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 13, 303–306. Katz, L. Y. , Fotti, S. A. , &amp; Postl, L. (2009). Cognitive‐behavioral therapy and dialectical behavior therapy; adaptations required to treat adolescents. The Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 32, 95–109. Lagerberg, T. , Fazel, S. , Sjolander, A. , Hellner, C. , Lichtenstein, P. , &amp; Chang, Z. (2022). Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and suicidal behaviour: A population‐based cohort study. Neuropsychopharmacology, 47, 817–823. Lammers, M. W. , Vroling, M. S. , Crosby, R. D. , &amp; van Strien, T. (2022). Dialectical behavior therapy compared to cognitive behavior therapy in binge‐eating disorder: An effectiveness study with 6‐month follow‐up. The International Journal of Eating Disorders, 55, 902–913. Lewis, G. , Duffy, L. , Ades, A. , Amos, R. , Araya, R. , Brabyn, S. , Button, K. S. , Churchill, R. , Derrick, C. , Dowrick, C. , Gilbody, S. , Fawsitt, C. , Hollingworth, W. , Jones, V. , Kendrick, T. , Kessler, D. , Kounali, D. , Khan, N. , Lanham, P. , … Lewis, G. (2019). The clinical effectiveness of sertraline in primary care and the role of depression severity and duration (PANDA): A pragmatic, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled randomised trial. Lancet Psychiatry, 6, 903–914. Lin, M. P. , You, J. , Wu, Y. W. , &amp; Jiang, Y. (2018). Depression mediates the relationship between distress tolerance and nonsuicidal self‐injury among adolescents: One‐year follow‐up. Suicide &amp; Life‐Threatening Behavior, 48, 589–600. Lin, T. J. , Ko, H. C. , Wu, J. Y. , Oei, T. P. , Lane, H. Y. , &amp; Chen, C. H. (2019). The effectiveness of dialectical behavior therapy skills training group vs. cognitive therapy group on reducing depression and suicide attempts for borderline personality disorder in Taiwan. Archives of Suicide Research, 23, 82–99. Liu, J. , Guan, J. , Xiong, J. , &amp; Wang, F. (2024). Effects of transcranial magnetic stimulation combined with sertraline on cognitive level, inflammatory response and neurological function in depressive disorder patients with non‐suicidal self‐injury behavior. Actas Españolas de Psiquiatría, 52, 28–36. Liu, Y. , Zhao, J. , &amp; Guo, W. (2018). Emotional roles of mono‐aminergic neurotransmitters in major depressive disorder and anxiety disorders. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 2201. Lopez‐Pinar, C. , Rosen, H. , Selaskowski, B. , Staerk, C. , Jans, T. , Retz, W. , Retz‐Junginger, P. , Roesler, M. , Sobanski, E. , Huss, M. , Matthies, S. , Tebartz van Elst, L. , Berger, M. , Jacob, C. , Kis, B. , Colla, M. , Alm, B. , Abdel‐Hamid, M. , Martinez‐Sanchis, S. , … Philipsen, A. (2024). Exploring the relationship between adherence to therapy, treatment acceptability, and clinical outcomes in adults with attention‐deficit/hyperactivity disorder: Results from the COMPAS multicenter randomized controlled trial. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 93, 46–64. March, J. S. , Klee, B. J. , &amp; Kremer, C. M. (2006). Treatment benefit and the risk of suicidality in multicenter, randomized, controlled trials of sertraline in children and adolescents. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 16, 91–102. McCauley, E. , Berk, M. S. , Asarnow, J. R. , Adrian, M. , Cohen, J. , Korslund, K. , Avina, C. , Hughes, J. , Harned, M. , Gallop, R. , &amp; Linehan, M. M. (2018). Efficacy of dialectical behavior therapy for adolescents at high risk for suicide: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 75, 777–785. Morey, L. C. , Bender, D. S. , &amp; Skodol, A. E. (2013). Validating the proposed diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 5th edition, severity indicator for personality disorder. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 201, 729–735. Niu, H. M. , Zhang, Z. M. , Mu, X. M. , &amp; Zhao, H. J. (2023). The characteristics and influencing factors of nonsuicidal self‐injury of adolescents with depressive disorder in China: A meta‐analysis. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 211, 448–452. Ogut, C. , &amp; Sezer, C. C. (2024). The effects of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors on impulsivity in Young adults with major depression in the early phase of treatment. Türk Psikiyatri Dergisi, 35, 186–197. Qiao, Y. , He, S. , Su, L. , Zhu, J. Z. , Sheng, J. H. , &amp; Li, H. F. (2017). Applicability of the Chinese version of the personal and social performance scale in patients with severe mental disorders. Asia‐Pacific Psychiatry, 9, e12271. Rathus, J. H. , &amp; Miller, A. L. (2002). Dialectical behavior therapy adapted for suicidal adolescents. Suicide &amp; Life‐Threatening Behavior, 32, 146–157. Sajatovic, M. , Levin, J. , Tatsuoka, C. , Micula‐Gondek, W. , Fuentes‐Casiano, E. , Bialko, C. S. , &amp; Cassidy, K. A. (2012). Six‐month outcomes of customized adherence enhancement (CAE) therapy in bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 14, 291–300. Sheehan, D. V. , Lecrubier, Y. , Sheehan, K. H. , Amorim, P. , Janavs, J. , Weiller, E. , Hergueta, T. , Baker, R. , &amp; Dunbar, G. C. (1998). The mini‐international neuropsychiatric interview (M.I.N.I.): The development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM‐IV and ICD‐10. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 59, 22. Smarason, O. , Skarphedinsson, G. , &amp; Storch, E. A. (2024). Cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety and depression in children and adolescents. The Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 47, 311–323. Sorensen, J. O. , Rasmussen, A. , Roesbjerg, T. , Verhulst, F. C. , &amp; Pagsberg, A. K. (2022). Suicidality and self‐injury with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in youth: Occurrence, predictors and timing. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 145, 209–222. Stecher, C. , Cloonan, S. , &amp; Domino, M. E. (2023). The economics of treatment for depression. Annual Review of Public Health, 45, 527–551. Strawn, J. R. , Mills, J. A. , Suresh, V. , Peris, T. S. , Walkup, J. T. , &amp; Croarkin, P. E. (2022). Combining selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and cognitive behavioral therapy in youth with depression and anxiety. Journal of Affective Disorders, 298, 292–300. Sylvia, L. G. , Reilly‐Harrington, N. A. , Leon, A. C. , Kansky, C. I. , Calabrese, J. R. , Bowden, C. L. , Ketter, T. A. , Friedman, E. S. , Iosifescu, D. V. , Thase, M. E. , Ostacher, M. J. , Keyes, M. , Rabideau, D. , &amp; Nierenberg, A. A. (2014). Medication adherence in a comparative effectiveness trial for bipolar disorder. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 129, 359–365. Thom, R. P. , Alexander, J. L. , Baron, D. , Garakani, A. , Gross, L. , Pine, J. H. , Radhakrishnan, R. , Slaby, A. , &amp; Sumner, C. R. (2021). Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors: How long is long enough? Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 27, 361–371. Turner, B. J. , Austin, S. B. , &amp; Chapman, A. L. (2014). Treating nonsuicidal self‐injury: A systematic review of psychological and pharmacological interventions. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 59, 576–585. Walkup, J. T. , Albano, A. M. , Piacentini, J. , Birmaher, B. , Compton, S. N. , Sherrill, J. T. , Ginsburg, G. S. , Rynn, M. A. , McCracken, J. , Waslick, B. , Iyengar, S. , March, J. S. , &amp; Kendall, P. C. (2008). Cognitive behavioral therapy, sertraline, or a combination in childhood anxiety. The New England Journal of Medicine, 359, 2753–2766. Wang, Z. , Whiteside, S. P. H. , Sim, L. , Farah, W. , Morrow, A. S. , Alsawas, M. , Barrionuevo, P. , Tello, M. , Asi, N. , Beuschel, B. , Daraz, L. , Almasri, J. , Zaiem, F. , Larrea‐Mantilla, L. , Ponce, O. J. , LeBlanc, A. , Prokop, L. J. , &amp; Murad, M. H. (2017). Comparative effectiveness and safety of cognitive behavioral therapy and pharmacotherapy for childhood anxiety disorders: A systematic review and meta‐analysis. JAMA Pediatrics, 171, 1049–1056. Yuan, J. , Zheng, M. , Liu, D. , &amp; Wang, L. (2024). Effect of acceptance and commitment therapy on emotion regulation in adolescent patients with nonsuicidal self‐injury. Alpha Psychiatry, 25, 47–53. Associated Data Data Availability Statement The data used for the study are available in the present study.