421 cbelifesci CBE Life Sciences Education CBE Life Sci Educ American Society for Cell Biology PMC11659868 11659868 11659868 39531581 10.1187/cbe.24-02-0069 Using AsianCrit Theory to Understand How Anti-Asian Hate Impacted Mental Health Among Asian Women in STEM Doctoral Programs Anantharaman Aashika † * Farra Aisha † Chang Eunhu † Wilkins-Yel Kerrie G † Lo Stanley Monitoring Editor † Department of Counseling and School Psychology, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA 02125 Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. ✉ *Address correspondence to: Aashika Anantharaman ( a.anantharaman001@umb.edu ). Winter 2024 23 4 ar57 ar57 21 12 2024 © 2024 A. Anantharaman et al. CBE—Life Sciences Education © 2024 The American Society for Cell Biology. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). It is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0 ). “ASCB®” and “The American Society for Cell Biology®” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology. Abstract Steeped in the AsianCrit theoretical framework, the current study examined how anti-Asian hate impacted the mental health of Asian and diasporic Asian doctoral women in STEM. Six emergent themes were identified: 1) Witnessing and Experiencing Anti-Asian Hate; 2) Lack of Institutional and STEM Departmental Support; 3) Impact of Anti-Asian Hate on Asian Women's Mental Health; 4) Protecting One's Mental Health; 5) Resist to Persist; and 6) Calls for Action to Combat Lack of Departmental Support. These findings highlight how Asianization through stereotypes such as the forever-foreigner status, viewing Asians as a monolith, the yellow peril stereotype, and model minority myth simultaneously rendered Asian graduate women hypervisible in the U.S. society and invisible in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Implications for teaching and mentoring are included. These highlight the need for faculty to challenge institutional norms that perpetuate the erasure of the toll that anti-Asian hate levied on Asian doctoral women in STEM. status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Received 2024 Feb 12; Revised 2024 Sep 11; Accepted 2024 Sep 19. Anti-Asian racism and the accompanying psychological distress have increased multifold since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. From March 2020 to March 2022, a total of 11,500 hate incidents against Asian American and Pacific Islander (AAPI) people were reported to Stop AAPI Hate (Stop AAPI Hate, 2022 ). Over the year following the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, anti-Asian hate speech on Twitter rose by 900%, and over 6600 hate crime incidents targeting Asians and Asian Americans were reported. Additionally, there was a 164% increase in hate crimes targeting Asians and Asian Americans in the first quarter of 2021, compared with the previous year ( Costello et al. , 2021 ). Despite this alarming increase in hate, many within science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines continue to purport a personal-professional divide whereby topics related to decreased mental health and “personal problems” are rendered taboo, or seen as inappropriate and unprofessional for discussion within STEM spaces ( Mousavi et al. , 2018 ; Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2022 ). This personal and professional divide remains at a time when Asian American students reported a 23% increase in severe anxiety, a 10% increase in moderate anxiety, and a 9% increase in severe depression in association with the rise in COVID-related racism targeting Asians ( Zhou et al. , 2023 ). Similarly, Asian international students reported a 16% increase in severe depression and a 12% increase in severe anxiety ( Zhou et al. , 2023 ). It follows then that the negative toll of navigating subtle and overt anti-Asian hate is likely rendered invisible in many STEM milieus. Furthermore, societal stigma surrounding mental health issues impacts help-seeking among racial/ethnically minoritized groups. Studies have found that Asian American/Pacific Islanders were least likely to utilize mental health services, such as outpatient therapy, and factors such as cultural and familial stigma, language barriers, inadequate health insurance, and cost barriers, were associated with their decreased utilization of mental health support systems ( Garland et al. , 2005 ; Spencer et al. , 2010 ; Gee et al. , 2020 ). Given the lack of discourse about mental health in STEM, compounded by the cultural stigma surrounding open discussions about mental health, and the rise in anti-Asian hate, further examination is needed to better support Asian doctoral students in STEM. To date, most research endeavors in STEM aggregate the data for Asian women, men, and gender diverse students ( Park et al. , 2018 ). In doing so, these efforts perpetuate the notion that there is a universal “Asian” experience regardless of gender. However, Asian women in STEM must contend with a myriad of exclusionary and isolating encounters that are largely the result of the dominant white masculine hegemony promulgated in many STEM milieus (hegemony in this case refers to the ways in which men's dominance over women is normalized due to the cultural and institutional contexts; Connell and Messerschmidt, 2005 ). Due to the model minority stereotypes and the relative visibility of Asian (men's) faces in STEM, Asian women's racialized and gendered experiences go largely unacknowledged ( Castro and Collins, 2020 ). In one of the few and recent studies to examine Asian women in the STEM, Castro and Collins (2020) found that Asian American women experienced microaggressions such as witnessing colleagues who were men make inappropriate sexual jokes and comments, and gendered racial stereotyping such as being assumed to be submissive, passive and obedient, being depersonalized as “robots” due to their accomplishments, and men in the workplace disregarding their identities and competencies as scientists and instead seeing them as potential romantic interests. Due to the model minority myth and relative visibility of Asian men in higher level STEM career and academic positions, Asian women in STEM are thought to be unaffected by gendered racism and therefore thought to be irrelevant to efforts related to addressing the inequitable and hostile STEM climate, despite their career advancement and earning power being lower than men and white 1 women counterparts ( Wu and Jing, 2011 ). The invisibility and erasure of Asian women's voices and experiences in STEM also render invisible the pain and toll of navigating anti-Asian hate. Research shows that systemic barriers such as anti-Asian racism, and the resulting psychological toll, can have large-scale implications on research output, academic productivity, quality of scientific research, and STEM persistence ( Levecque et al. , 2017 ; Nagy et al. , 2019 ; Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2022 ). Yet, there is a dearth in empirical examinations that address how the resurgence in anti-Asian hate has impacted the mental health of Asian women in STEM specifically. To combat this erasure, the current study examined how experiencing and bearing witness to anti-Asian racism affected the mental health of Asian doctoral women in STEM. ASIAN CRITICAL THEORY (ASIANCRIT) FRAMEWORK The current undertaking is guided by the Asian Critical Theory framework ( Museus, 2014 ), a conceptual lens based in Critical Race Theory (CRT: Delgado and Stefancic, 2000 ) and used to understand how racism impacts Asian Americans ( Museus, 2014 ). The Asian Critical Theory framework, otherwise referred to as the AsianCrit framework, uses CRT in conjunction with Asian American history and lived experiences to foreground tenets that frame the systemic issues plaguing Asian American communities ( Museus, 2014 ). Specifically, AsianCrit consists of seven tenets: 1) Asianization (the way Asians are racialized and stereotyped in American society, for example, the way in which Asian women are racialized as hypersexual and submissive “objects”); 2) Transnational Contexts (examining the historical and contemporary economic, political, and social contexts for Asian Americans both nationally and internationally); 3) (Re)Constructive history (re-examining American historical narratives to expose racism toward Asians and (re)constructing an Asian American narrative centered on Asian voices and lived experiences); 4) Strategic (Anti)Essentialism (acknowledging how dominant and oppressive economic, political, and social factors affect how Asian Americans are racialized in society); 5) Intersectionality (examining how interlocking systems of oppression (e.g., sexism, ableism, xenophobia) intersect to shape Asian Americans’ lived experiences) ( Crenshaw, 1991 ; Collins, 2002 ); 6) Story, Theory, and Praxis (emphasizing the interconnectedness of counterstories, theoretical work, and practice in advocacy work for Asian communities, and how the voices of Asian Americans need to inform such praxis); and 7) Commitment to Social Justice (employing critical theory to effectively advocate for the elimination of different forms of oppression) ( Museus and Iftikar, 2013 ). Extant research has applied the AsianCrit framework to Asians of all genders and Asian women in STEM. For example, studies have aimed to understand the experiences of second-generation Vietnamese American women pursuing pharmaceutical careers ( Dam, 2021 ), and differing rates of STEM major selections in college among Asian American ethnic subgroups ( Kang et al. , 2023 ). In the latter study, researchers found that Filipino college students of all genders pursued STEM at a rate that was 60% lower than Chinese students, and Asian women in the study pursued STEM majors at a rate that was 46% lower than Asian men ( Kang et al. , 2023 ). Yao and Mwangi (2022) discussed the benefit of the AsianCrit lens, specifically the tenets Asianization and transnational contexts, in their review of literature on the impact of racist nativism on Asian international students in the United States and the villainization of them being characterized as bearers of COVID while simultaneously reaping the financial benefits of their enrollment in United States higher education system (i.e., being “cash cows”). Asian American college students in STEM have been studied recently using the AsianCrit framework, wherein themes such as downplaying, minimizing, and even developing a tolerance to forms of racism (e.g., microaggressions) was prevalent among the sample ( Zheng et al. , 2024 ). This minimization was largely due to comparisons Asian students made with the overt racism experienced by their non-Asian peers of Color ( Zheng et al. , 2024 ). Together, these results stress the importance of gaining a nuanced understanding of the experiences of Asian students from varying ethnic backgrounds and gender identities to combat the exclusion and invisibility of Asian students from equity and social justice discourses, particularly within STEM. Furthermore, this extant research offers evidence to suggest that the AsianCrit framework is well suited to frame the current undertaking on the mental health of Asian doctoral women in STEM. This is especially important given the modern-day manifestations of anti-Asian hate. Historical and Contemporary Manifestations of Anti-Asian Hate in STEM and Society The insidious message that rang throughout the Western world in 2020 was that the novel coronavirus was the “China Virus” ( Li and Nicholson, 2021 ). This abhorrent message has had negative and far-reaching implications on not only individuals from China, but for Asian communities all over the world. According to the Stop AAPI Hate Survey administered in 2021, 1 in 5 Asian Americans reported experiencing racial trauma due to anti-Asian racism ( Saw et al. , 2021 ). Despite the resurgence in this hate, anti-Asian racism is not a new phenomenon. Modern-day forms of marginalization and xenophobia against Asians and Asian Americans are rooted in a long history of anti-Asian racism in the United States ( Haft and Zhou, 2021 ). These contemporary manifestations of hate can be understood within the context of a long lineage of racists beliefs and tropes about Asians including but not limited to: 1) Asians are a monolith, 2) Asians are the “model minority,” 3) Asian people are a danger to Western society (i.e., the Yellow Peril), and 4) Asians are “forever foreigners” ( Museus and Iftikar, 2013 ). In the following sections we will discuss each of these tropes in more detail as it pertains to STEM and societal contexts. Asians are a “Monolith”. The pan-Asian ethnic racism of today is largely a result of the insidious and enduring perception of Asians as a monolithic group ( Li and Nicholson, 2021 ). However, the Asian population living in the United States is incredibly diverse, with a fast-growing population of over 22 million with roots in more than 20 countries spanning the Asian continent (Budiman and Ruiz, 2021 ). Yet the group most regarded as the “typical Asian,” is those of East Asian descent. Viewing Asians as a monolith, and essentializing the East Asian experience as the universal Asian experience, renders invisible the experiences of large groups of non-East Asian individuals. For example, the interplay of Asian ethnic identities such as Korean, Pakistani, Filipina, and religious backgrounds such as Muslim as well as gender identities, and sexuality, results in individuals facing vastly different structural barriers in society ( Tseng and Lee, 2021 ). Not only are Asian students viewed as a monolith in the broader society, but this experience is also perpetuated within STEM departments and programs. These practices imply that there is a universal “Asian experience” no matter a students’ ethnic background or gender identity, when in fact, that is not the case. For example, Southeast Asians despite being considered part of the “model minority” Asian monolith, are in some contexts racialized as “deviant minorities,” who are academically inferior ( Museus and Iftikar, 2013 ). Erasure of the struggles faced by Asian subgroups through the viewing of Asians as a monolith, and the model minority stereotype results in lowered support and resources for Asian students who are struggling academically ( Lin, 2021 ). Furthermore, this has a demoralizing impact on Asian women in STEM specifically given that programs intended to support people from racially/ethnically minoritized groups tend to benefit men, while programs intended to support women tend to benefit white women ( Ong et al. , 2011 ) Asians are the “Model Minority”. The model minority myth is a racist stereotype promulgated by white supremacists’ ideology that presents Asians and Asian Americans as academically and occupationally successful ( Museus, 2014 ). This narrow definition of “success” causes Asian Americans to face high amounts of pressure and psychological distress if they do not live up to these expectations of academic achievement and renders invisible those Asian individuals who are struggling academically, emotionally, and psychologically ( Yoo et al. , 2015 ; McGee, 2018 ; Lin, 2021 ; Yip et al. , 2021 ). Additionally, the model minority myth dismisses and minimizes the role that racism and other structural barriers play in marginalizing Asians people's lives, while creating comparative discourses of blame between different minoritized groups without regard for the different structural barriers faced by each group ( Museus and Iftikar, 2013 ; Mudambi, 2019 ; Tseng and Lee, 2021 ). Nowhere is the model minority myth starker than in STEM. Due to Asians being regarded as overrepresented in STEM higher education programs compared with their composition in the national population, coupled with essentializing beliefs that Asians are “naturally good” at math and science, Asian students are often excluded from research related to equity in STEM ( Wu and Jing, 2011 ). Such exclusionary practices perpetuate false narratives that Asian students, especially Asian women, do not need further assistance in educational and academic spaces, despite facing racialized and gendered microaggressions as well as an inordinate amount of pressure to uphold the academic performance expected of them ( Castro and Collins, 2020 ; Lin, 2021 ). Findings that Asian women in STEM fields do not advance to leadership positions at the same rate as their white or men counterparts, shows the need for their inclusion in equity-based research in the field ( Ong et al. , 2011 ). Furthermore, the model minority narrative that Asians are high occupational achievers, in conjunction with viewing Asians as a monolith, renders invisible Asian students in STEM who are first-generation students from working-class or lower-income backgrounds ( Tu and Okazaki, 2021 ). By upholding model minority beliefs and viewing Asians as a monolith, systemic structures in STEM reify the contemporary manifestation of anti-Asian hate. COVID-19 as the Contemporary Manifestation of Yellow Peril. Asians are paradoxically held to either the “model minority” standard of economic and academic assimilation to white culture, or regarded as a threat to whites, bringing in diseases and danger to Western society. These types of conflicting stereotypes serve to keep Asians and Asian Americans in the space of the “other.” Specifically, as both different from, or even better than, other racially/ethnically minoritized groups, as well as inferior foreigners to whites ( Li and Nicholson, 2021 ). Viewing Asians as dangerous is hardly a new phenomenon. The illusory perils that Asian immigrants carry germs and diseases is a modern-day perpetuation of historical narratives about them being untrustworthy, diseased invaders ( Del Visco, 2019 ; Li and Nicholson, 2021 ). The media circulating repeated stigmatizing messages that blamed and scapegoated Asians as the cause and carriers of COVID-19 is a modern-day retelling of the “Yellow Peril” stereotypes. Bresnahan et al. (2023) regarded such rhetoric as a form of “digital racism.” The irresponsible fear-mongering propaganda against Asians by those in positions of extreme power have only served to strengthen racist associations and fueled anti-Asian sentiments and behavior ( Haft and Zhou, 2021 ; Bresnahan et al. , 2023 ). By purporting a personal-professional divide whereby topics related to “personal problems” are rendered taboo in STEM spaces ( Mousavi et al. , 2018 ; Wilkins-Yel et al ., 2022 ), the racist experiences of navigating “yellow peril” stereotypes have likely gone unacknowledged, or worse, further perpetuated in STEM. Such silence in academic milieus enables the continued perpetuation of this stereotype. For example, Chinese international students on U.S. campuses face increased levels of explicit discrimination such as being accused of being “bearers of COVID” as well as being scrutinized and policed for wearing face masks, by peers, faculty, and strangers ( Lei and Huijing, 2021 ). This racism faced by Chinese international students on campuses, exposes how Asian students are simultaneously viewed through the model minority myth and yellow peril stereotypes ( Yao and Mwangi, 2022 ). As Yu (2022) notes, “the “yellow peril” and the “model minority” stereotypes are two sides of the same racist coin, which whites possess the absolute power to flip as needed” (p. 97). To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there are no studies to date that have examined how anti-Asian hate, specifically enacted through racist experiences of Yellow Peril, affected Asian women in STEM during the pandemic. However, reports such as The Rising Tide of Violence and Discrimination Against Asian American and Pacific Islander Women and Girls (Stop AAPI Hate, 2021 ) noted that 78% of AAPI women reported being affected by anti-Asian racism between 2020 and 2021, and 55% had personally encountered specific instances of racism. Furthermore, studies such as Lee et al. (2023) noted that Asian women encountered gendered racists attacks such as being yelled at, mocked for speaking in their native language, and called racial slurs. Given the high incidence of these experiences, it is likely that Asian women in STEM would experience similar anti-Asian hate. Asians as “Forever Foreigners” The Asianization of Asian Americans as “forever foreigners” occurs when Asians are regarded as incapable of assimilation or integration into American society and culture, and regardless of immigration status or nationality, are often assumed to be foreign-born ( Museus and Iftikar, 2013 ). The propagation of racial aggression toward Asian Americans during COVID-19, such as being blamed for bringing COVID-19 to the United States, exposes the status of Asians as “perpetual foreigners” in America, and illuminates the underlying assumptions that Asians’ are unable to fully assimilate into U.S. society ( Li and Nicholson, 2021 ). Within STEM, Asian American students described experiencing the forever foreigner status when they were mistaken for international students, and perceived as being unable to assimilate to American culture ( Castro and Collins, 2020 ). International Asian women in STEM programs face biases about their competency in the U.S. job market because of the underestimation of their English language skills (Bhamidipati and Goris, 2019 ). The forever foreigner status in conjunction with the Yellow Peril stereotype, is evident in discourses in United States higher education systems wherein Asian students are seen as “curve breakers,” “taking over” campuses, and therefore being threats to other students ( Lee, 2006 , p. 8) In sum, these long-standing racist stereotypes (i.e., Asians are a monolith, Asians are the “model minority,” Asian people are a danger to Western society [i.e., the Yellow Peril], and Asians are “forever foreigners”) have plagued the experiences of Asians living in the United States for decades. More recently, they have reignited the wave of anti-Asian hate produced by the politicization of the COVID-19 pandemic through Western media and propaganda ( Sims et al. , 2022 ). The manifestation of such hate not only affected Asian students’ lived experiences in the broader society at-large, but also within STEM milieus. To combat the intersectional erasure of Asian women's voices, especially within the STEM context, more work is needed to understand how anti-Asian hate uniquely affected Asian women's mental health. Burgeoning research has noted that decreased mental health negatively affects STEM graduate students’ academic and research productivity, as well as their intentions to persist in STEM ( Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2022 ). Graduate Student Mental Health and Anti-Asian Hate Recent reports indicate that graduate students are six times more likely than the general population to experience moderate to severe symptoms of anxiety and depression ( Evans et al. , 2018 ). These elevated levels of distress have led researchers to sound the alarm that a “mental health crisis” is plaguing graduate education ( Evans et al. , 2018 ). For many STEM graduate students, their mental health distress can be linked to competitive STEM climates, excessive demands to publish, pervasive #grindculture, financial difficulties, unsupportive advisors, and grueling comprehensive exams ( Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2022 ). Given the white, masculine hegemony rife in STEM graduate programs, the typical graduate school stressors are magnified for women from racially/ethnically minoritized backgrounds. They must navigate intersecting gendered and racialized oppressions characterized by gendered racism, sexism, invisibility, hypervisibility, isolation, and being implicitly or explicitly asked to prove one's legitimacy in STEM ( Johnson, 2011 ; Ong et al. , 2011 ; Alexander and Hermann, 2016 ; Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2019 ). For example, Asian American graduate women in a study by Castro and Collins (2020) , described hearing their lab mates who were men make sexist jokes about the male genitalia in their STEM laboratories. Unlike many of their white counterparts, Women of Color must also navigate systemic and structural barriers outside of STEM. For instance, given the resurgence in anti-Asian hate, Asian graduate women are witnessing, and for some experiencing, rampant acts of anti-Asian hate. These violent acts of hate include, among others, the murders of 6 Asian women in Atlanta in March 2021, the stabbing of an Asian woman at a bus stop at a prominent university in the Midwest in January 2023, and a police officer mocking a South Asian woman international student's death in Seattle in January 2023 (Chavez and Chen, 2022 ; Jiménez, 2023 ; Salam, 2023 ). These acts of hate have heightened Asian women's vigilance, anxiety, and depression ( Chae et al. , 2021 ; Yip et al. , 2021 ). Although these experiences of hate occur outside of STEM, disenfranchising practices within STEM, such as assumptions of neutrality and objectivity ( Imad et al. , 2023 ), graduate faculties and peers’ lack of awareness of the realities of anti-Asian racism, and the general business-as-usual ethos pervasive in STEM, can render invisible the psychological toll levied on Asian women while navigating the onslaught of hate and violence in their daily lives ( Endo, 2021 ; Hau Lam et al. , 2022 ). Furthermore, the assumptions of success imbued with the model minority trope, along with the practice of excluding Asian women from discourse on social justice in STEM ( Miles et al. , 2022 ), could exacerbate the invisibility of this psychological toll. Purpose of Study Given the large-scale impact that decreased mental health has on graduate students’ wellness as well as on their academic and research productivity ( Nagy et al. , 2019 ; Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2022 ), more research is needed to understand how anti-Asian hate has impacted the mental health of Asian doctoral women in STEM. Consequently, the current study, steeped in AsianCrit theoretical framework, aimed to fill this gap by centering the voices of Asian doctoral women in STEM through the following research question. How does experiencing and/or bearing witness to anti-Asian hate impact Asian women STEM doctoral students’ mental health? Notably, the focus of this study is on Asian and diasporic Asian women (or Asian Americans) who are currently enrolled in STEM doctoral programs in the United States. From here on out, when we refer to Asian women we are referring to both Asian and diasporic Asian women. In communicating this explicitly here, we hope to avoid treating Asians as a monolith—and Asian Americans as “forever foreigners.” MATERIALS AND METHODS Positionality Statement The research team consisted of all four authors on this study. The first author identifies as an Indian international student in a counseling psychology doctoral program. Her upbringing in Singapore and India informs her understanding of Asian cultures, and the nuanced experiences of different Asian ethnic groups. Her identity as a South Asian woman in the United States and experiences in the mental health field have informed her intersectional approach, understanding of the impact of gendered racism, and commitment to social justice. The second author identifies as an Arab Latina international and first-generation college student enrolled in a counseling psychology doctoral program. Her past and current work with girls and Women of Color in STEM have shaped her understanding of how systemic racism and sexism impact the success of Women of Color in academic STEM settings. The third author is a nonbinary Korean international doctoral student in counseling psychology. Their positionality is shaped by their research and scholarship on illuminating/exploring strengths of sexual and gender minoritized populations against social stigmas and enhancing their mental health and well-being. The fourth author identifies as a Black queer immigrant woman and an Associate Professor of counseling psychology. Her positionality is informed by critical race feminist epistemology as well as her intersectional approach to promoting gendered racial equity and wellness among women from racially/ethnically minoritized backgrounds in STEM. Given our shared experiences navigating interlocking systems of oppression as well as our collective expertise in mental health, this team was acutely aware of how bearing witness and experiencing acts of hate can levy a deleterious toll on one's mental health. We believe that this shared experience as well as our diverse racial/ethnic composition helped promote multiple ways of looking at the experiences shared by Asian women participants and helped manage the prior understandings we brought to the data analysis activities. Additionally, recognizing our privilege as knowledge producers ( Boveda and Annamma, 2023 ) in being able to conduct this study, we intentionally utilized Asian scholars and applied AsianCrit in our study to center the voices and experiences of Asian women. By doing so, we sought to resist whiteness by incorporating a framework (i.e., AsianCrit) that was made for Asians by Asians that focuses on their unique racial experiences that are caused by racism, especially gendered racism in the case of Asian women. Participants The current study draws on a sample of 48 Asian doctoral women in STEM ranging in age from 23 to 37 ( M = 25.88, SD = 2.62). Five participants did not provide their age. Participants self-identified as Bangladeshi (4%), Chinese (46%), Filipino (10%), Indian (15%), Japanese (4%), Korean (15%), Taiwanese (8%), Vietnamese (2%), and Thai (2%). Seven participants identified as biracial/multiracial or noted more than one racial/ethnic group. These biracial/multiracial participants were included in the tally of the specific Asian ethnic groups. Hence, the total will be more than 100%. Less than half of our sample identified as international (44%), with most of the international students identifying their home countries as China (43%) and India (19%). Most participants identified as straight (63%), and the remaining as bisexual (27%), queer (13%), and lesbian (4%). One participant did not provide their sexual orientation. Of all the participants, 90% identified as not having a disability. In terms of relationship and marital status, participants self-identified as single (71%), partnered (10%), married (15%), and as living with their partner (4%). Participants were enrolled in an array of STEM graduate programs, including the physical sciences (48%), engineering (38%), technology (6%), and mathematics (8%). Additionally, most of the participants identified as being either in the first year (33%) or second year (38%) of their doctoral program. Participants were assigned pseudonyms to better describe their responses in the Results section. See Table 1 for the full list of pseudonyms and corresponding participant demographic information. Procedures Upon receiving Institutional Review Board approval (#2022021), Asian doctoral women were recruited for participation in the current study. Participants were recruited from a database of graduate Women of Color in STEM that was created by one of the coauthors. Graduate Women of Color in this database were from ∼90 randomly selected universities across the United States. Each of these universities had at least one STEM doctoral program. Graduate Women of Color in this database provided university affiliated email addresses for verification and indicated an interest in participating in research related to the experiences of women in STEM. A total of 237 graduate students in this database self-identified as Asian/Asian American women pursuing a PhD in STEM, and as such, served as the pool of participants from whom we recruited for the current study. With a study sample of 48 Asian/Asian American doctoral students, we had a 20% response rate. Interested participants were first presented with an informed consent and, upon providing consent, were routed to a series of open-ended questions and demographic questions that were administered online via Qualtrics (see below for more details about the open-ended questions). To meet the inclusion criteria for this study, participants must have been 18 years or older and identified as an Asian or Asian American woman enrolled in a STEM doctoral program in the United States. Participants who did not provide informed consent or meet the inclusion criteria for this study were routed to the end of the survey. Participants who completed the survey, 1) received a list of resources to support their mental health, including finding therapists of color in their respective areas, and 2) were entered into a raffle to win one of 20 $25 electronic gift cards. Open-ended Questions The six open-ended questions used in the current study invited participants to describe their experiences as Asian women in STEM doctoral programs amidst the resurgence in anti-Asian hate and the impact such experiences had on their mental health. The development of these six questions was anchored in existing knowledge of anti-Asian hate based on sources such as Stop AAPI hate (Stop AAPI Hate, 2022 ), and literature exploring historical and contemporary experiences of the Asian communities in America ( Museus, 2014 ). The questions were designed and reviewed by the research team, which was comprised of graduate students and faculty, women and nonbinary folx, including those of Asian descent. Two sample open-ended questions were, “ How has witnessing and/or experiencing anti-Asian hate impacted your experience as an Asian graduate woman in STEM? ” and “ In what ways have you coped with these experiences of hate? If you have had difficulties coping, what has made coping particularly challenging during this time?. ” A full list of the six questions can be found in the Supplemental documents. Participants’ responses to the open-ended questions ranged between 130 words to 608 words, indicating that participants wrote short to full paragraphs in response to each question. This use of open-ended questions in this study aligns with past research ( Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2019 ; Powless et al. , 2022 ; Gregor et al. , 2024 ) and is a useful mechanism to gain a deepened understanding of a phenomenon with a relatively large sample. Analytic Approach Constant comparative analysis ( Glaser, 1965 ; Corbin and Strauss, 2008 ) grounded in a critical constructivist lens ( Kincheloe, 2005 ; Kincheloe and McLaren, 2011 ) was used to systematically examine how witnessing and experiencing anti-Asian hate affected the mental health of Asian doctoral women in STEM. In using a critical constructivist approach ( Kincheloe, 2005 ), we situated our analysis and meaning-making in how historical, systemic, and power dynamics shaped the lived realities of Asian doctoral women in STEM. The analytic process included the development of a codebook and two cycles of coding. In alignment with our research question, we collectively and iteratively developed a codebook to serve as a guide for our analysis ( Braun and Clarke, 2023 ). In doing so, each team member individually reviewed 10 participants’ open-ended responses and engaged in inductive identification of participants’ experiences of anti-Asian hate and how those experiences impacted their mental health. After this review, the research team met as a group and cocreated a preliminary codebook to serve as a guide for our analysis ( Braun and Clarke, 2023 ). Each member then used this preliminary codebook to individually code another set of 10 open-ended responses and identified any additional codes that emerged from the data. Following this coding, the team met as a group to discuss the preliminary codes, refined codes that were similar, and finalized the codes that were included in the final codebook. With the finalized codebook, the team then individually coded all of the participants’ open-ended responses. Sample codes included “difficulty coping,” “impact on mental health,” and “identity-based oppression.” As part of the second round of coding (pattern coding), research team members, individually and then collectively, systematically reviewed the coded data for each code for patterns across participants. Pairs of team members reviewed the coded data for each code and wrote topical summaries of their observed patterns. Over the course of several weeks, the team met as a group and collectively discussed these topical summaries. These meaning-making conversations enabled us to gain a deeper understanding of how anti-Asian hate manifested in participants’ lives and the ensuing impact on their mental health. Finally, codes and accompanying topical summaries were organized and grouped into themes based on similarities, alignment with existing research, and AsianCrit theory. For example, two notable patterns were observed in reviewing the coded data for the code “identity-based oppression.” We observed that participants described both witnessing and experiencing anti-Asian hate, and discussed their nuanced gendered racialized experiences of anti-Asian hate. These observations were among those that shaped the development of Theme #1 (Witnessing and Experiencing Anti-Asian Hate) and Subtheme #1 (Experiencing Anti-Asian Hate Inside and Outside STEM) and Subtheme #2 (Impact of Gendered Racist Anti-Asian Hate). Through this iterative process, the research team generated six emergent themes and four subthemes. Trustworthiness and Rigor To support the credibility of our analysis, each research team member engaged in a reflective process of memoing during their individual coding process. In doing so, we noted how our lived experiences, identities, and positionalities shaped our interpretation of the data. Then, through weekly research meetings, we engaged in critical collective reflections of these memos to foreground how our individual processes and identities shaped how we interpreted the participants’ experiences. These conversations deepened our collective understandings of the participants’ experiences and supported our explicit roles as researchers in cocreating meaning with the participants. Further, we attended to both fairness and confirmability ( Morrow, 2005 ) by intentionally engaging multiple perspectives in the data coding and analysis process. Thus, reducing the likelihood that any single researcher's interpretation outweighed the voices of the participants’ themselves in our meaning making. Together, these practices underscored our approach to maintaining methodological integrity. RESULTS Steeped in AsianCrit theoretical framework ( Museus, 2014 ), the current study centered the voices of 48 Asian women enrolled in STEM doctoral programs to examine how anti-Asian hate impacted Asian doctoral women's mental health. Our analysis identified six emergent themes (see Table 2 ). These six themes included: 1) Witnessing and Experiencing Anti-Asian Hate , 2) Lack of Institutional and STEM Departmental Support , 3) Impact of Anti-Asian Hate on Asian Women's Mental Health , 4) Protecting One's Mental Health , 5) Resist to Persist , and 6) Calls for Action to Combat the Erasure of Anti-Asian Hate in STEM . In the following sections, we describe each theme and provide corresponding excerpts from participants’ open-ended responses. Theme #1: Witnessing and Experiencing Anti-Asian Hate Forty participants endorsed directly experiencing or witnessing anti-Asian hate. This theme consisted of 27 domestic students and 13 international students, from largely Chinese ( N = 17) and Korean ( N = 6) backgrounds. Witnessing and experiencing anti-Asian hate, both within and outside of STEM milieus, is described below through two subthemes: 1) Experiencing anti-Asian hate inside and outside STEM , and 2) Impact of gendered racist anti-Asian hate . Subtheme #1: Experiencing Anti-Asian Hate Inside and Outside STEM. Asian doctoral women described directly experiencing anti-Asian hate while in public spaces in the United States. These experiences were largely characterized by the Asianization of Asian Americans through the “yellow peril myth,” specifically “blaming China for COVID-19.” For instance, a Chinese international woman in engineering, Jing Yi, described an encounter where she was walking on the street while wearing a mask and an unmasked mother “pointed at me, [and] talked to [her] kids saying keep [your] distance from Asian[s], and then left me far away intentionally.” Jing Yi described feeling “confused” by this racist encounter given the extent of the COVID precautions that she engaged in weekly (i.e., mask wearing, COVID tests, physical distance, etc.). Similarly, Yun, a Chinese American woman in Chemistry stated, “I was walking down the street, and someone driving by yelled at me to not bring the virus to the US.” Not only were these blatant racist manifestations of the “yellow peril myth,” but the latter encounter also perpetuated the “forever foreigner” stereotype as the perpetrator assumed that this Asian participant, despite being an American, must have not been from the United States. These racist encounters did not stop here. Alix, a Chinese American woman in Chemistry shared, I was walking with two of my labmates, who were both white men, and a man spat at me while biking past. This was shocking and hurtful to me, but I also was frightened because I'd seen police reports of increased violence against Asians in our area as well. I've started biking to and from work more than walking, and taking public transportation sometimes makes me nervous.∼ Alix Alix noted the psychological toll of “being spat at” by stating that she was frightened and nervous and, as such, changed her mode of transportation to protect herself from another act of anti-Asian hate. The impact of such hate was also echoed by Hee-Jin, a Korean international woman in Information Technology who stated, “it just adds another level of wariness.” She went on to share how these experiences of hate heightened her awareness of her racial identity by stating, “I have never felt more aware of my race as I have during this pandemic.” Other participants described an increased awareness of their identities resulting in hypervigilance, which manifested as avoiding public areas, strangers, or situations where they could potentially face racist attacks. For example, Mika, a Taiwanese American woman in Microbiology said she would “avoid speaking Chinese or using Chinese names for normal things (e.g., food)” when she was in public. Asian doctoral women participants not only had to navigate anti-Asian hate in the broader society, but they also had to contend with instances of such hate inside their STEM departments and labs. For example, Maria, a Filipino American woman in Information Technology shared how a prominent STEM faculty described Asian students as “basically white” when they attempted to bring up the plight of Asian people in their STEM department. This statement is a manifestation of the “model minority” myth and simultaneously dismissed and minimized the marginalization that Asian students experienced. Maya, an Indian American woman in Chemistry shared that she witnessed her PI “ask[ing] 2 East Asian men in [her] lab to compile some resources on anti-Asian hate.” Maya further shared that her East Asian colleagues experienced this task as “burdensome.” Asking members of the group that is being marginalized to educate other members of the lab was likely well-intentioned, but it rendered invisible the toll that anti-Asian hate levied on these students and placed the responsibility and, in turn, burden of educating others about anti-Asian racism, on the students whose communities were currently experiencing racist attacks. So, not only must these students navigate the toll of witnessing anti-Asian hate, as well as the worry for themselves and their loved ones, but they must also find resources to educate others in their lab. Alternatively, the PI, as the power holder in the lab, could have taken the lead in finding and compiling these resources and enlisting the support of the campus’ Asian Studies department to determine the appropriateness of the compiled materials. Subtheme #2: Impact of Gendered Racist Anti-Asian Hate. The pejorative and hateful messages that were spewed about Asian individuals during the dual COVID-19 and racism pandemic centered primarily on individuals’ Asian identities and them being the sole bearers of the COVID-19 virus. So, anti-Asian hate in the United States had a primarily racialized focus. However, the spree of shootings that occurred at two spas and a massage parlor in the metropolitan area of Atlanta, Georgia on March 1, 2021 was simultaneously a racialized and gendered act of Asian hate perpetrated against Asian women wherein the perpetrator's motives highlighted the long ignored issue of the objectification of Asian women (Chavez and Chen, 2022 ). This act of hate resulted in Asian women around the country experiencing vicarious and collective trauma through witnessing this act of hate against their community, and was a stark reminder of their lack of safety due to the gendered racism and hypersexualization they face (SPOKENproject, 2022 ). For many participants, witnessing the killing of these 6 Asian women in Atlanta, while also navigating anti-Asian hate from the COVID-19 pandemic, had an especially deleterious impact on their mental health. Kaili, a Chinese multiracial American woman in Physics shared, I feel what impacted me more than hearing a lot about anti-Asian hate (e.g., Trump calling Covid the “Kung Flu”) were specific events that had to do with Asian women as targets of hate, sexualization, and exotification, and that these events were even more amplified in the wake of the general anti-Asian hate. The shooting of the women in the massage parlor brought up complex feelings in a way I was not expecting. ∼ Kaili Kaili's narrative highlighted the toll of not only navigating the racialized component of anti-Asian hate, but also the “hate, sexualization, and exotification” that were products of the gendered manifestation of anti-Asian hate against Asian women specifically. She described how, as an Asian woman, she was uniquely impacted by the shootings of the Asian women at the Spa in Atlanta. Given the gendered focus of acts of hate like this spree of shootings, Asian women felt especially targeted. Christina, a Filipino multiracial American woman in Biology also shared that these experiences “ma[d]e me uncomfortable as an Asian woman.” She went on to state that “white men fetishizing Asian women [has been] extremely normalized” in the United States. It was this fetishization, coupled with viewing Women of Color as disposable, that likely contributed to the killing of the 6 Asian women at the Atlanta spa ( Chavez and Chen, 2022 ). The confluence of the psychological toll of these shootings coupled with the lack of acknowledgment in STEM milieus, levied a significantly negative impact on participants. For instance, Kim, a Vietnamese and Chinese biracial woman in Engineering stated, “I find it frustrating that even though there [are] a lot of Asian women dying in [major northeast U.S. city], there is no attention being shown in my program.” Similarly, Alix shared that the increased stress and anxiety that she experienced after the shootings were magnified by the loneliness and invisibility she felt in STEM. She shared, “I felt especially lonely, as I am the only Asian American woman in my lab, and I felt like no one really wanted to talk about it or understood how it felt for me.” Alix's experience highlights how navigating her lab as the only Asian woman has been lonely and isolating. So, not only does she not have others who can understand her experiences, but the toll of witnessing such gendered racialized hate against Asian women was also rendered invisible by those within her STEM milieu. This experience of invisibility and isolation uniquely impacted Asian women and contributed to them needing to take time away from their research and academics. For instance, Em, a gender expansive Chinese multiracial American student in Chemistry whose university was near the shootings shared that it was “especially difficult” to witness these killings and, as such, needed to “take a week out of [the] lab to deal with the shock and feelings.” Given the mental health toll of this shooting, and the ensuing impact on her ability to do work, Em rightfully prioritized their mental health. Upon returning to the lab, Em shared “my lab mates knew why I took time off but didn't…say anything to me.” They described this feeling as “very strange.” So, here we have another participant highlighting how the lack of acknowledgment about these acts of hate by those within their STEM lab further exacerbated the toll of witnessing anti-Asian hate. This lack of acknowledgment was echoed by Maria, who stated that her “program's disregard for Asian people was made clear when reports of the murders of Asian women went unacknowledged and there was no outreach to check on the health and wellbeing of Asian students.” So, Asian women in STEM are navigating feelings of isolation for being the only or one of the only in their STEM milieus, and these experiences are worsened when the toll of witnessing anti-Asian hate is met with silence and disregard from those within STEM. It is in this way that STEM perpetuates the erasure and invisibility of Asian women and their experiences. Theme #2: Lack of Institutional and STEM Departmental Support The narratives of 24 Asian doctoral women, which consisted of 8 international students and 16 domestic students from largely Chinese ( N = 8) and Korean ( N = 5) backgrounds, shed light on how STEM departments fell short in providing institutional support amidst the resurgence of anti-Asian hate. This lack of support manifested as a lack of acknowledgment of how racism affected Asian doctoral students, dismissal, and performative emails. This lack of acknowledgment also contributed to STEM departments providing little to no space for Asian doctoral students to discuss and process the impact of such hate. Jia, a Chinese American woman in Chemistry aptly asked, “where is the support for Asians/Asian Americans?” She continued by describing her frustration with this lack of support. She stated, It's frustrating to hear that Asian Americans are “over recruited” since statistically there are more students represented in the program compared with the nation's population percentage. But this fact neglects to account for the diversity of the Asian American identity and the skew towards East Asians. Furthermore, Asian Americans aren't considered POC and don't receive adequate support as POC. In the eyes of my white peers, I may seem like I'm going through the same struggles that they are in the graduate program, but they forget that I also have the additional burden of navigating a majority white space. It can be difficult to bring up Asian American issues to these peers since I do not get the same validation or understanding as I would from another POC. ∼ Jia Jia cites the overrepresentation of Asian graduate students in STEM, relative to their percentage in the U.S. population, as the reason for the lack of support from her STEM graduate program. However, she goes on to state that this biased metric for determining who is deserving of support renders invisible the toll that white supremacist practices and structural racism levies on Asian graduate students. Furthermore, this metric perpetuates racist anti-Asian stereotypes by viewing all Asians as a monolith and makes East Asian experiences the universal experiences for all Asian graduate students in STEM. Maya added to the “Asians being overrepresented in STEM” as a rationale for the lack of support and stated that STEM exists “in a bubble” and does “not acknowledge people's identities.” She went on to share that the perpetual division of one's personal and professional lives in STEM results in these departments providing “no forums to express our feelings.” She also noted that the lack of discourse about anti-Asian hate in the workplace and “having to act as if everything is normal in the bubble of the university is difficult and can be mentally draining.” Hee-Jin further described this notion, saying, “it really reinforced the sense of Asians being the so-called ‘model’ minority for me. Don't complain, keep your head down, ignore all the injustice, etc.” Hee-Jin's sentiment aptly summarizes how the model minority myth silences Asian and Asian American students’ pain—they are unable to “complain,” must keep their heads down, and ignore injustices as though they never happened. Some participants noted that even when spaces of support were provided, faculty members’ dismissiveness counteracted the intended support that these spaces were supposed to provide. Maria shared, At one point, while Asian students were literally weeping from sharing the terrible experiences they've had just because they were Asian, some white faculty members got frustrated from having to hear our voices. One said “we can't just talk and talk and talk” and another asked us to tell them how to solve racism by telling them exactly what to do. This was so unbelievable that I was in shock for a while. I truly did not know how either of those responses could've been viewed as appropriate or how anyone outside of the Asian communities could have let that go. ∼ Maria As Maria's narrative demonstrates, faculty members’ dismissive behaviors diminished the degree to which this processing space felt supportive to Asian doctoral students. This dismissiveness manifested as minimizing Asian students’ emotional expression, which could have been a form of prioritizing white comfort. In addition to this dismissiveness, faculty members placed the responsibility and burden of solving racism on the students whose community was currently experiencing racist attacks versus taking responsibility, as power brokers in STEM, to address such anti-Asian hate themselves. It is evident from this participant's narrative that these behaviors by the faculty were not helpful or supportive. Andrea, a biracial Chinese Filipino woman in Mathematics described a similar experience of dismissal, saying “I mentioned in passing that the hate crimes in Atlanta had impacted my ability to complete [my] research, but my (white) collaborators took no notice and continued with our regular meetings.” Andrea's experience highlighted how the impact of witnessing gendered racialized hate against the Asian women who worked at a spa in Atlanta was rendered invisible by her white colleagues. These colleagues fell short in seeing the toll that these acts of hate had on her, and in doing so, conveyed that the psychological toll of these experiences were unimportant in STEM milieus. Lack of institutional support also manifested as performative emails. These email statements were seen as necessary but wholly insufficient. Specifically, participants detailed how their STEM departments sent email statements acknowledging anti-Asian hate but failed to engage in any action beyond that email. For example, Maya stated, “[these emails] seem like another instance of my graduate department “talking the talk” but not “walking the walk.” [In fact,] I did not expect them to take substantial action and they did not, nothing changed.” It is telling when students have come to no longer expect that their STEM programs will take action against injustice. Similarly, Yun stated “I didn't really receive any support besides university emails expressing solidarity, which practically doesn't amount to anything.” Thus, email statements were perceived as performative and unhelpful. Furthermore, participants described how the emails, coupled with the lack of change, made them feel as though they were not cared for, and that their community's struggles were not valid. For example, Jia stated, “by not seeing a strong stance by my department nor hearing from my peers, it seems like my community's struggles aren't valid nor worthy of support.” Jia went on to say “[this] has made me somewhat resentful [toward the program] since it seems like inclusivity and equity only applied in certain situations.” Evidently, concrete actions, beyond emails, are needed to demonstrate that Asian students are supported and valued by their STEM community. Theme #3: Impact of Anti-Asian Hate on Asian Women's Mental Health A total of 40 Asian doctoral women, 83% of the sample, shared that their mental health was negatively impacted by anti-Asian hate. Twenty-seven domestic students and 13 international students endorsed this theme. Participants largely self-identified as Chinese ( N = 17), Korean ( N = 6), Indian ( N = 6) and Filipino ( N = 4). The psychological impact of anti-Asian hate included increased anxiety, fear for their safety, depression, hopelessness, as well as difficulty coping. Subtheme #1: Psychological Ramifications of Anti-Asian Hate. Participants’ narratives indicated that the resurgence in anti-Asian hate coupled with the media exposure about hate crimes targeting Asians resulted in increased feelings of anxiety, worry, depression, and fear of being in public. For example, Soo, a Korean American woman in Engineering stated that anti-Asian hate “has definitely taken a long-term mental health toll as constantly processing the violence on my [Asian] community and taking steps to try and avoid such violence on myself is quite draining.” Similarly, Hee-Jin shared the following: [Anti-Asian hate] just adds another level of wariness. I am very cognizant of my status as an Asian woman, and international/foreigner when I interact with people in public. Now the awareness that there are a lot of people who actively hate people that look like me is just another thing I'm always subconsciously aware of. It means…more stress and anxiety. You care more about how you act, how you talk, [and] how you portray yourself. ∼ Hee-Jin Hee-Jin not only felt very aware of her identities as an Asian woman and a “foreigner,” but now has the added toll of worrying about her safety because there are people committing racist and hate-filled acts against the Asian community. Being in such environments where participants had to manage their feelings of anxiety and worry took an insidious toll on participants’ psychological health. Such anxiety manifested in a myriad of ways including feeling “paralyzed by fear,” being “unable to sleep at night” and “losing weight due to not being able to eat.” In addition to feeling increased anxiety and worry, participants also described experiencing depression, isolation, and hopelessness. Andrea described experiencing feelings of “hopelessness with every news story I read about anti-Asian hate crimes.” Maria shared that, “the rise of publicized anti-Asian hate” makes her existing depression “near unmanageable most days” and she “only feels safe locked in my house, hidden in my bed.” Asian doctoral women's narratives also illuminated how the psychological toll levied by anti-Asian hate significantly affected their research and academic productivity. For instance, Kim shared, “both witnessing and experiencing anti-Asian hate has made me unable to work on my research and be able to focus on doing what I came to do my PhD for.” Similarly, Soo stated that continuously navigating anti-Asian hate has “left less time/energy for me to dedicate to my program.” Soo went on to share that the heightened anxiety that resulted from witnessing and experiencing anti-Asian hate is now at a level where it is “difficult to ignore while going through day-to-day activities. Subtheme #2: Difficulties Coping with Anti-Asian Hate. Although witnessing and experiencing anti-Asian hate levied a considerable psychological toll on Asian doctoral women's mental health, the confluence of these acts of hate with the COVID-19 pandemic made it especially challenging to cope and protect one's mental health. Key to stopping the spread of the coronavirus was physical distancing, quarantining, and limited social interaction. So, being safe in one arena (i.e., protecting oneself from COVID-19) meant that Asian doctoral women were largely isolated from friends, family, and loved ones. Sixteen participants noted how this isolation impacted their coping. Angela, a Filipino American Woman in physics shared, It has been difficult to cope because for most of the pandemic I have been separated from my family, and I find it hard to connect to most Asian affinity groups or peers because I am from an underrepresented Asian ethnicity. ∼ Angela Angela's narrative indicated that being separated from family for most of the pandemic made it difficult to cope with anti-Asian hate. Furthermore, as someone from an underrepresented pan-Asian ethnic group (Filipino), she also found it challenging to connect with most Asian affinity peers. Her experience shed light on the multiplicative forms of isolation she experienced while navigating the COVID-19 pandemic and anti-Asian hate. As mentioned in Theme #1 Subtheme #2, participants’ feelings of isolation were further exacerbated because they were often the only Asian woman in their STEM programs or had only non-Asian peers. For instance, Maya shared, “It's hard to cope sometimes because I know very few people in my field/department who are also Asian women, and trying to vent/explain my experiences isn't cathartic because I have to do a lot of explaining.” Understandably, having to explain why one would feel the way they do, versus just being able to discuss their feelings, can take away from the benefits of emoting. So being the only Asian women in their STEM environments rendered invisible their simultaneously gendered and racialized experiences and thwarted their ability to get support from those within their STEM milieu. As it pertained to coping with the gendered racism enacted on Asian women in Atlanta, participants noted that being the only Asian woman in their STEM departments led to feelings of loneliness which was exacerbated by the lack of acknowledgment of this hate by those within their STEM spaces. For instance, Alix stated, “I felt especially lonely, [because] I am the only Asian American woman in my lab and I felt like no one really wanted to talk about [the spa shooting in Atlanta] or understood how it felt for me.” Similarly, Christina noted that to her friends in her STEM program, the spa shooting of the 6 Asian women in Atlanta “was just another shooting” and only her friends from back home “had the capacity to understand what it meant.” She went on to describe the psychological toll of this experience by saying, “this made me extremely sad to be away [from hometown] even though I should be excited about my graduate school experience.” The narratives of Alix and Christina illuminated how those within STEM perpetuated anti-Asian hate through the erasure of Asian women's experiences, and exacerbated the mental health toll experienced by Asian women in STEM. It is one thing to feel the pain of seeing women who looked like you being murdered because of their gender and racial identities, but for that pain to be dismissed and discarded as “just another shooting” can exponentially magnify the trauma of this gendered racialized act of hate. As highlighted by Christina, such dismissal by those in STEM increased feelings of sadness about being away from home and diminished excitement about the graduate school experience. With isolation impacting participants’ abilities to cope, 15 participants described using avoidance and disconnection as coping mechanisms. For example, Kim said, “I have been sleeping way more as a freeze type of defense mechanism.” Similarly, Maria described “periods of disconnect from the world,” saying she played video games, and watched fantasy TV shows and movies. These participants’ narratives highlight how mentally and physically separating themselves from thinking about anti-Asian hate served as a form of self-protection. Theme #4: Protecting One's Mental Health A total of 31 Asian doctoral women described the myriad of ways they protected their mental health against the deleterious toll of anti-Asian hate. This theme consisted of 22 domestic students and 9 international students, who largely self-identified as Chinese ( N = 13), Korean ( N = 5), Indian ( N = 4), and Filipino ( N = 3). Asian doctoral women described protecting their mental health by drawing strength and support from their community, as well as through the utilization of therapy. Thirty participants described actively connecting with Asian peers and Asian community support systems to deal with the negative psychological impact of anti-Asian hate. Jing Yi stated, “in this [Asian] community, people will more easily understand the difficulties [that I am going through].” Similarly, Reyna, a Filipino American woman in Engineering described having very supportive peers during the resurgence of anti-Asian hate, specifically saying “many of my peers and friends are also Asian/Asian American and did their best to make situations safe (e.g., travel in groups).” Reyna also noted that her peers being vocal on social media about anti-Asian hate was reassuring to her and conveyed care. By leaning on their Asian community, participants described feeling a sense of safety and solidarity, and therefore felt more confident that their struggles would be understood. Furthermore, Aki, a Japanese and Taiwanese American woman in Chemistry said, “I tend to group with Asian American women to bond over similar experiences and fears. It feels like a safer sense of community while navigating a harder chapter of my life.” Aki's response highlighted the salience of shared gender and race-based counterspaces to emote and get support. For several participants, friendships, and a sense of solidarity with non-Asian People of Color also helped them cope with the impact of anti-Asian hate. For instance, Jia said she turned to “friends and other POCs” to discuss her frustrations “since we can all relate to similar struggles.” Similarly, Christina shared that talking with a Native American biracial friend was extremely supportive. She said, “we are both biracial, and we have had many talks about the struggles of not feeling like we belong to our cultures. Having her to talk to is one of my best coping mechanisms.” Mingyu, a Chinese American woman in Engineering said that experiencing and witnessing anti-Asian hate made her want to surround herself “with a more diverse STEM community,” thus exemplifying how diversity in STEM environments serves as a buffer against the toll of anti-Asian hate. Similarly, Fatima, an Indian international woman in Engineering noted that the international community in her university was “very diverse and inclusive,” causing her to feel supported in her program. Other participants went beyond their STEM departments to be in community with other People of Color. Kiara, an Indian American woman in the sciences said talking to friends outside of the lab has been helpful to not “feel as crazy being impacted by things that are happening in the real world.” (Re)Connecting with one's heritage, culture, history, and fostering a sense of racial/ethnic pride was also a powerful way to cope with anti-Asian hate. Lisa, a Japanese multiracial American woman in Engineering said, “during the pandemic I started listening to popular Asian music to better appreciate Asian culture.” She went on to describe how having grown up in a predominantly white culture and neighborhood, feeling a sense of appreciation for her Asian identity was especially important for her. Similarly, Angela stated, “I have tried to cope by connecting to my heritage through food, family stories, and research.” Alix described how raising her consciousness about the historical contexts of anti-Asian hate was a helpful coping strategy. She stated, “I've done a lot of reading related to this topic since the start of the pandemic (Cathy Park Hong's Minor Feelings, Jay Caspian Kang's The Loneliest Americans, Charles Yu's Interior Chinatown)” and added that reading about these issues made her feel more positive that these issues were beginning to be discussed. Notably, only 5 participants in our sample reported therapy as one of their coping resources. Hui, a Chinese International woman in Engineering shared, “I have my therapist to deal with all the mental issues generated during COVID” and Priya, an Indian international woman in Engineering said, “I coped with the experience of hate by going to therapy.” Maria said, “ I try to unpack my fear and aloneness and rage in therapy, and that has been helping too, but for most of the pandemic, I didn't have access to that.” For Maria, therapy was a helpful way to process anti-Asian racism; however, therapy services were less available during the pandemic when participants needed this support the most. Given that only 5 of 48 participants discussed therapy as a resource for protecting their mental health, it is arguable that more mental health services specializing in Asian mental health are needed. Theme #5: Resist to Persist Although anti-Asian hate exacted a tremendous psychological toll, 20 Asian doctoral women's narratives highlighted the myriad of ways they resisted this hate and its accompanying effects on their STEM persistence. These participants consisted of 13 domestic and 7 international students who were largely Chinese ( N = 9), Bangladeshi ( N = 2), Filipino ( N = 3), and Korean ( N = 2). For some participants, this resistance manifested as a resounding conviction to persist to degree completion and not let anyone rob them of their hard work. This was aptly described by Maria, who said, “My degree will in some ways be a FUCK YOU on paper, but mostly it'll be all of my hard work and heart.” Similarly, Soo stated, “[anti-Asian hate] has made me alternatively more determined to go into academia and help improve these issues.” Yingyue, a Chinese international woman in Information Technology stated that she has become inspired “to delve deeper into [her] field of study as an Asian woman and strive for more [re]presentation and contribution.” Evidently, participants actively chose to persist in STEM as a way to enact their Equity Ethic ( McGee and Bentley, 2017 )—that is, using their degrees and/or positionality as Asian/Asian American women to support and advocate for those with similar marginalized identities. For some, this resistance came after initial considerations to discontinue their STEM pursuits. This was illustrated in the following excerpt from Andrea: In 2021, I seriously considered leaving my graduate program to pursue a job in social justice or with an Asian American advocacy group. I felt that my research was not having a great enough impact on the important issues facing my community, and I felt I could put my skills to better use serving the Asian community rather than the scientific community. I ultimately decided to stay in my program, and academia…I believe I can be an advocate for students of color within the math community and I hope to help push the culture more towards equity and inclusion. ∼ Andrea For Andrea, the resurgence in anti-Asian hate contributed to her questioning the impact of her research and, in turn, her persistence to degree completion. However, she ultimately decided to stay, in part, because she would be able to advocate for Students of Color and contribute to a more equitable culture within the mathematics discipline. Resistance also manifested as participants choosing to discontinue their pursuit of STEM careers. Such actions clearly conveyed that they did not want to collude with others in STEM to perpetuate harm and hate or be subjected to endure harm and hate themselves. For example, Em stated that “frustrations with my PI/environment about racism, sexism, homo/transphobia, etc. led me to leave my field altogether. I'm still in science, but I have left research and chemistry.” Additionally, Angela shared that witnessing anti-Asian hate at all levels, including against Asians and Asian American faculty has strained her intentions to continue into academia. She went on to state “Anti-Asian hate directed toward Asian and Asian American faculty and researchers has been a glaring reminder that proximity to whiteness nor any level of respectability can[not] protect us from the violence of white supremacy.” These narratives shed light on how witnessing and/or experiencing anti-Asian hate, racism, sexism, homophobia, and transphobia within STEM has prompted Asian women to change their career goals or leave their field altogether. Leaving was the ultimate act of resistance to protect one's mental health. Theme #6: Calls for Action to Combat the Erasure of Anti-Asian Hate in STEM The narratives of 20 Asian doctoral women, which consisted of 4 international students and 16 domestic students from largely Chinese ( N = 8), Filipino ( N = 3), and Korean ( N = 3) backgrounds, provided specific and concrete strategies for how they would have wanted their STEM departments to support them amidst the resurgence in anti-Asian hate. These action strategies spanned three broad areas: 1) acknowledge anti-Asian hate, 2) provide space for processing and building community, and 3) provide mental health support. First, participants stated that they wanted their STEM departments to acknowledge anti-Asian hate. For instance, Lian, a Chinese American woman in Chemistry shared that she would have wanted her STEM program to “protect and validate the experiences of Asian Americans instead of pretending none of it happens.” Participants’ narratives indicated that acknowledgment of anti-Asian hate would ensure that Asian doctoral women felt seen and heard by those within STEM milieus. Maria shared the following: I think the bare minimum of support I needed from my institution was being heard and seen respectfully, rather than being treated like we were wasting people's time or that we should have come to them with solutions for racism and violence instead of our lived experiences and vulnerabilities. I feel like if they did even just that little bit, they would be able to use their power to foster [our] safety and belonging, but they didn't.∼ Maria Maria's quote highlighted how she would have simply wanted those within her STEM department to see and hear Asian doctoral women, instead of dismissing and discrediting their experiences. In doing so, she shared that STEM faculty could have used their power to foster an increased sense of belonging and safety. Kiara spoke to the necessity of acknowledgment of anti-Asian hate in the STEM workplace specifically. She stated, “the worst impact on my mental health has been not acknowledging these things in a work setting, which is where many people spend a majority of their time.” With some STEM graduate students spending more than 60 h per week in the lab ( Welde and Laursen, 2008 ), it follows then that the setting where they spend such a considerable amount of their time needs to see and acknowledge the hate inflicted on their communities. In addition to acknowledging anti-Asian hate, participants called on STEM departments to create space and time for Asian graduate students to process how they were negatively impacted by anti-Asian hate. For instance, Angela stated, “I wish there had been an opportunity for Asian people in the department to build community or converse with one another.” Similarly, Soo shared, “[I] would have liked to receive actual conversations/outreach to Asian community members to discuss what we actually need[ed].” To combat the personal-professional divide rampant in STEM milieus, Amara, a Thai international woman in Engineering asked for more spaces where she could engage in “more personal talk other than research [talk].” Sang-Hee, a Korean American woman in Information Technology highlighted how providing space for Asian graduate students to process anti-Asian hate would be especially fitting in Computer Science given the large number of Asian students in the discipline. She went on to ask that Computer Science departments have “more talks or discussions on how anti-Asian hate affect the state of computer science/how computer science can perpetuate these issues.” Sang-Hee's sentiments speak to how these processing spaces are especially needed in programs with many Asian students. Lastly, participants’ narratives shed light on how they would have wanted their PIs and STEM departments to provide more concrete mental health support. Soo called for “increased access to mental health resources (especially recommendations for AAPI mental health professionals). Maya stated, “I wish there was an in-house counselor with a similar background.” Lisa noted the need for this mental health support to come directly from those who hold leadership positions in STEM departments/programs. She stated, “I think the department could have encouraged mental health days off for Asian students after prominent hate crimes were publicized on the news.” Similarly, Andrea shared, “I would have appreciated…letting students feel that it was okay to take a break.” Undoubtedly, implementing department-wide, better yet institution-wide, mental health days off would clearly communicate an institution's prioritization of students, faculty, and staff's mental health. Such system-wide actions were echoed by Maya who stated, “I wish there was more… top-down support in my department.” DISCUSSION The current study centered the voices of Asian doctoral women in STEM to understand how anti-Asian hate impacted their mental health. A strength of this examination is that it foregrounded (re)constructive history , a core tenet of the AsianCrit theoretical framework ( Museus, 2014 ). Iftikar and Museus (2018) noted that “Asian Americans are typically invisible and voiceless in U.S. history” (p. 940). However, through (re)constructive history these scholars posit that researchers can transcend this invisibility and silence by re-analyzing the history to expose racism toward Asians and create a collective Asian historical narrative by centering the voices and contributions of those within the Asian community ( Iftikar and Museus, 2018 ). The current undertaking aimed to do just that. Specifically, through the voices of Asian doctoral women in STEM, this study made visible how contemporary manifestations of anti-Asian racism was rooted in historically racist Asian narratives. This examination also disrupted the invisibility of Asian students’ psychological distress, typically invisiblized by the racist model minority trope, to illuminate the toll that anti-Asian hate levied on participants’ mental health. The findings are discussed below in three sections: 1) Asianization and Anti-Asian (Gendered) Racism, 2) Systemic Erasure of Anti-Asian Racism in STEM, and 3) Asian Women's Enactment of Resistance to Protect their Mental Health. Asianization and Anti-Asian (Gendered) Racism Asianization is a key tenet within the AsianCrit Framework, and Museus (2014) refers to it as the way in which white supremacy and pervasive nativistic racism in the American society lumps all Asians into a monolithic group and racializes the entire group as model and deviant minorities, perpetual “forever” foreigners, and threatening yellow perils. AsianCrit posits that these racialized constructions of Asians serve as a conduit through which white supremacy informs policies, perspectives, and practices that levy hate, dehumanization, and exclusion on the Asian community ( Iftikar and Museus, 2018 ). The repeated and stigmatizing messages that blamed Asians as the cause and carriers of COVID-19 was a modern-day manifestation of the illusory “Yellow Peril” (i.e., a racist belief that all Asians are immigrant carriers of germs and diseases [ Del Visco, 2019 ; Li and Nicholson, 2021 ]). In the current study, Asian, specifically East Asian, doctoral women in STEM described experiencing racist attacks such as being yelled at, spat on, and shunned by others because of the resurgence in the belief that they were carriers of the deadly COVID-19 virus. One participant, a Chinese American woman in Chemistry, stated that “a man spat at me while biking past.” She went on to describe this racist encounter as “shocking and hurtful.” These acts of hate were likely the result of anti-Asian racist fearmongering spewed by leaders and heads of state in the United States. Fearmongering, a characteristic of white supremacy ( Okun and Jones, 2001 ), was a driving force in viewing Asians as carriers of disease in the 19th century, and the racist rhetoric surrounding the pandemic reignited these views of Asians as well as the accompanying racist attacks. Not only did this fear mongering make others fearful of Asians, this rhetoric, and racist attacks, contributed to Asian women fearing for their safety as well. So, participants described feeling compelled to change their behaviors to protect themselves from further attacks. For instance, they described changing their commute routes and the form of transportation they used (e.g., biking vs. walking), and they also avoided speaking Chinese or using Chinese names for things such as ordering food in public. So, white supremacist fear mongering levied hate against Asian doctoral women and contributed to them being forced to change their ways of being to ward off any further hate. With 40 of the 48 participants in the current study endorsing either experiencing and/or witnessing anti-Asian hate, these results aligned with extant research that noted a 164% increase in hate crimes targeting Asians and Asian Americans in 2021 compared with the previous year ( Costello et al. , 2021 ). Furthermore, these results align with reports such as the “ The Rising Tide of Violence and Discrimination Against Asian American and Pacific Islander Women and Girls ” that state that AAPI women and girls reported acts of hate 2.2 times as often as AAPI men (2021). This report further noted that most AAPI women (78%) reported being affected by anti-Asian racism between 2020 and 2021, and 55% endorsed personally experiencing attacks of hate. Not only was racial Asianization a vehicle through which society racially oppressed Asians during the pandemic, but, in alignment with the AsianCrit theory, this racialization was also gendered . In this way, it uniquely impacted the lives of Asian women specifically. The gendered racialization of Asian women as hypersexualized and exotified ( Mukkamala and Suyemoto, 2018 ) was likely the impetus for the spree of shootings that killed 6 Asian women at a spa in Atlanta on March 1, 2021. These killings rocked the Asian community and had a disproportionate impact on Asian women. Asian doctoral women in the current study described experiencing vicarious racism through the observation of these racist killings in Atlanta. Participants described having to take time off from their labs “to deal with the shock and feelings” of witnessing the gendered racist attacks. As multiply marginalized individuals, these participants’ narratives highlight the multiplicative toll of navigating interlocking systems of gendered racial oppression. Mental Health Toll Rendered Invisible in STEM Milieus More than 83% of Asian doctoral women in the current study noted that their mental health was negatively affected by witnessing and experiencing anti-Asian hate. This impact on their mental health included increased anxiety, heightened fear for their safety, depression, and hopelessness. Notably, participants’ anxiety manifested as “feeling paralyzed by fear,” being “unable to sleep at night” and “losing weight due to not being able to eat.” These results are supported by extant research that shows that verbal harassment and shunning (i.e., the deliberate avoidance of Asians) contributed to an increase in symptoms of depression, anxiety, stress, and physical symptoms ( Saw et al. , 2021 ). Furthermore, these results are consistent with recent reports indicating a 23% increase in severe anxiety, a 10% increase in moderate anxiety, and a 9% increase in severe depression among Asian American students ( Zhou et al. , 2023 ). Participants noted that their decreased mental health negatively impacted their academic and research productivity such that they described feeling depleted, unable to focus, and had little time or energy remaining to dedicate to their scholarly pursuits. This is consistent with past research with Black graduate women in STEM that showed that navigating marginalizing experiences outside of STEM, such as the killing of unarmed Black people, levied a significant psychological toll, which in turn, impacted research output, academic productivity, quality of scientific research, and STEM persistence ( Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2022 ). With Asian women often not being included in the discourse around equity and justice in STEM ( Castro and Collins, 2020 ), the mental health toll of navigating anti-Asian hate is likely rendered invisible. Furthermore, decreased productivity, amidst hegemonic practices in STEM such as working long hours in the lab and navigating unrealistic expectations to publish consistently, can have significant negative implications for how Asian doctoral women in STEM are evaluated. Although most of the Asian doctoral women in the current study noted a decrease in mental health because of anti-Asian hate, only 1% (i.e., 5 participants) mentioned going to therapy. This underutilization of formal support systems suggests that there is a lack of formal mental health services or service providers that are equipped to support Asian doctoral women in STEM with their nuanced stressors. Previous research has highlighted barriers to accessing mental health services among Asian individuals in the United States, such as perceived societal stigma surrounding mental health issues, embarrassment due to familial and cultural stigma, language barriers, lack of health insurance, the cost of accessing services, and a lack of awareness about institutional support systems and methods of accessing them ( Spencer et al. , 2010 ; Gee et al. , 2020 ). While formal mental health structures may not have been accessible, participants described protecting their mental health by drawing strength and support from their communities. This support was primarily from Asian peers, non-Asian POC peers, and through (re)connecting with their Asian heritage. Despite this, scholars like Cheng et al. (2021) noted that while collective psychological resistance, through empowerment and solidarity, can be protective for Asian students, systemic change and institutional support in STEM remain critical. Systemic Erasure of Anti-Asian Racism in STEM and Mental Health AsianCrit Theory specifically adopts a systemic lens to understanding how institutional structures and powerbrokers enact racist practices, policies, and perspectives on those within the Asian community ( Iftikar and Museus, 2018 ). The findings of the current study, specifically shed light on the systemic racism rife within STEM educational settings and illustrate how these experiences affected the mental health of Asian doctoral women in STEM. In keeping with the Asianization tenet, STEM disciplines are notorious for lumping all Asians into a monolithic group and racializing them as overachieving model minorities ( Castro and Collins, 2020 ). According to Museus ( 2014 ), this construction of Asian Americans as model minorities has served as “one of the major organizing principles for resource distribution in the United States” (P. 24). By essentializing Asians as a “model,” those within STEM inherently view Asian students as not needing support and immune to the effects of oppressive systems. These views, in addition to the belief that Asian students are overrepresented in STEM, fuel exclusionary practices such as not including Asian students in DEI-based efforts in STEM. When those within STEM perceive Asian students in this way, one might ask the question, if you can't see me, how can you see my pain, much less support me when I am experiencing pain ? The narratives of Asian doctoral women in the current study highlighted how STEM faculty and peers rendered invisible both their experiences of anti-Asian racism as well as the toll that witnessing such hate levied on their mental health. In doing so, participants noted that their STEM departments failed to acknowledge the rampant acts of hate against the Asian community, provided little to no space for Asian students to discuss and process the impact of anti-Asian hate, and went so far as asking Asian students to “tell them how to solve racism.” The invisibilization of these participants’ experiences is also a likely byproduct of STEM disciplines espousing a stance on neutrality. Assumptions of neutrality and objectivity fuel the practice of (implicitly or explicitly) asking graduate students to compartmentalize and leave their personal lives “at the door” ( Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2022 ). These assumptions, coupled with characterizing Asians as the “model minority,” render invisible how oppressive anti-Asian hate experiences affect Asian doctoral women's mental health. Results also indicated that the systemic erasure and invisibilization of anti-Asian racism by STEM faculty took the form of racist characterization of Asian students as “honorary whites” ( Museus, 2014 ). This occurred when STEM faculty regarded Asian students who sought support from them as “basically white.” By equating Asian students’ lived experiences to those of white people, these faculty perpetuated the racialized Asianization of Asians as the model minority and further dismissed their race-based realities. This dismissiveness was aptly captured by one participant who said that her white STEM peers and faculty “forget that I also have the additional burden of navigating a majority white space.” The blatant denial of Asian doctoral women's racialized experiences comes at a time when researchers have called upon STEM faculty to examine their privileges, biases, and stereotypes, to ensure that they can adequately support students from minoritized backgrounds ( Killpack and Melón, 2016 ). The lack of substantive departmental support from STEM faculty and peers in the current study led Asian women to feel as though their struggles were “not valid” nor “worthy of support.” The systemic erasure of anti-Asian racism in STEM particularly affected Asian doctoral women after the killing of 6 Asian women at the spa in Atlanta. Given the severity of witnessing this brutal shooting, several participants stated that they had to take time away from their labs to prioritize their mental health. Even though the shooting visibly affected Asian doctoral women, they shared that both peers and faculty in their STEM labs were dismissive of the shooting and failed to check-in on their mental health after this shooting. The effect of this silence was further exacerbated by the isolation Asian women felt as the only or one of the only Asian women in their STEM labs and departments. Extant research has highlighted how Women of Color in STEM, including Asian women, often experience feelings of loneliness and isolation when they are the only or one of the only individuals in their lab who hold their identities ( Ong et al. , 2011 ; Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2022 ). So, not only is the impact of anti-Asian hate being dismissed in STEM, but the continued underrepresentation of Women of Color in STEM further increases the likelihood that Asian women have very few people in their STEM milieus who understand their lived experiences and can support them as they navigate anti-Asian hate. Asian doctoral women participants described this reality in STEM as “difficult and mentally draining.” Together, the paradoxical experience of being rendered simultaneously hypervisible as “disease carrying” by the broader U.S. society and invisible as a model minority in STEM milieus left Asian doctoral women in the current study in a perpetual state of unrecognized harm. It is for this reason that participants called on STEM faculty to provide more concrete support by: 1) acknowledging anti-Asian hate, 2) providing space in STEM to process the effect of such hate and for students to build community, and 3) providing students with mental health support. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS Although this study has a number of strengths, it is important to acknowledge the limitations and areas for future research. First, although we were intentional about highlighting participants’ ethnic identities throughout our reporting of the study's findings, this study did not specifically explore the unique experiences of women from varied Asian ethnic communities. The term “universal Asian experience” is an obvious oxymoron, in that Asians have roots in more than 20 countries across the Asian continent (Budiman and Ruiz, 2021 ). While our study was not designed to look at interethnic differences in anti-Asian racism, future studies should aim to better understand the nuanced impacts of anti-Asian hate across different Asian cultures and nationalities. Second, this study employed open-ended questions whereby participants submitted their typed responses via Qualtrics. Though this is a useful mechanism to reach a larger number of participants ( Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2019 ; Powless et al. , 2022 ), future studies with semistructured interviews could be used to allow for a more in-depth discussion of their experiences navigating anti-Asian hate. Furthermore, it is recommended that future open-ended or interview-based questions be written or asked in participants’ preferred language to provide ease and comfort in responding to questions. This would likely allow for richer responses from participants. Third, participants in the study often reported on racialized experiences when asked about experiences of discrimination. This limited our ability to analyze certain experiences Asian doctoral women in our sample faced as a result of gendered racism. This finding is not uncommon, as prior qualitative research exploring Women of Color's experiences of microaggressions through an intersectional framework has similarly found that Asian participants often thought of their experiences in terms of either race/ethnicity or gender ( Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2019 ). This nature of response is also prevalent in samples of Asian American women, wherein intersectionality was circumvented through either race or gender being downplayed due to experiences being interpreted to be a result of either racism or sexism, rather than both of these occurring simultaneously ( Zheng et al. , 2024 ). The intersectionality tenet of AsianCrit gives context to this phenomenon in participant responses, as it notes how societal single-axis narratives about racism or sexism, may make it difficult for individuals to conceptualize their experiences as intersectional oppression, and therefore only focus on one type of oppression when thinking about experiences of discrimination ( Iftikar and Museus, 2018 ; Wilkins-Yel et al. , 2019 ; Zheng et al. , 2024 ). Implications for Teaching, Mentoring, and STEM Institutions The findings of the current study shed light on how anti-Asian hate, occurring both inside and outside of STEM, impacted the mental health of Asian doctoral women in STEM. Given that nearly half of the study participants endorsed receiving little to no institutional support in the face of such hate, we intentionally focused the implications on how institutional stakeholders in STEM, such as advisors, professors, staff, and administrators, can support Asian doctoral women's mental health and STEM persistence. STEM stakeholders play a key role in mentoring students’ success and cocreating the STEM climate within which Asian doctoral women are immersed. Consequently, their actions will be the catalysts for the transformational change needed in STEM. In addition to gearing the implications of this study toward institutional change agents, they are also informed by two key sources. First, and in line with the AsianCrit tenet #6, Story, Theory, and Praxis wherein scholars recommend that the voices of Asian and Asian Americans should inform advocacy work, we situate the implications in the recommendations put forth by the participants, particularly those provided in theme 6 - Calls for Action to Combat the Erasure of Anti-Asian Hate in STEM . Second, we anchor the study implications in the recommendations put forth by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine in the Science of Effective Mentorship in STEMM Report ( 2019 ). This report details the scholarship on—or science of—mentorship and mentoring relationships and provides guidance via nine recommendations on effective behaviors that provide intentional, inclusive, and effective mentorship. To this end, we suggest four actionable mentoring and teaching strategies that graduate advisors, professors, and administrators within STEM departments can implement to promote the mental health and persistence of Asian doctoral women in STEM. Actionable Strategy #1: Acknowledge and Take Action Against Anti-Asian Hate First and foremost, it is imperative that faculty, staff, and administrators in STEM acknowledge the prevalence of anti-Asian hate and the toll that these occurrences of hate levy on Asian (women) doctoral students. Asian doctoral women in our study highlighted how a STEM culture of departmental silence and disregard for Asian American issues harmed them by perpetuating the historical erasure of Asian American struggles. Thus, highlighting how faculty's unsupportiveness was an added layer of anti-Asian hate that exacerbated the toll levied on Asian doctoral women's mental health. Acknowledging and taking action against the perpetuation of anti-Asian hate aligns with Recommendation #4 ( Recognize and Respond to Identities in Mentorship ) in the Science of Effective Mentorship in STEMM Report ( 2019 ). This recommendation aptly states that, “Mentors should learn about and make use of inclusive approaches to mentorship such as working toward cultural responsiveness, moving beyond “colorblindness,” intentionally considering how culture-based dynamics…negatively influence mentoring relationships.” Practical adoption and integration of such inclusive mentorship practices include creating spaces in STEM settings such as the advisor-advisee meetings, lab meetings, and the classrooms to check in about the impact of anti-Asian hate on Asian doctoral women's mental health. The creation of such check-in spaces goes beyond mere acknowledgment of anti-Asian hate, and together, may help Asian (women) doctoral students feel more comfortable discussing how these events impact them. Such spaces may also increase Asian doctoral women's willingness to seek departmental and/or programmatic support. Actionable Strategy #2: Mitigate and Eradicate Anti-Asian Hate in STEM In addition to STEM faculty's erasure of the impact of anti-Asian hate occurring outside of STEM, participants also described experiencing anti-Asian hate inside STEM. For example, STEM faculty explicitly regarded Asian students as “basically white” and perpetuated beliefs that Asians are innately successful in STEM (i.e., model minority myth). To disrupt the perpetuation of such racist beliefs, it is important that institutional stakeholders in STEM examine their unconscious biases and discontinue using stereotypes such as the model minority myth in their mentoring and teaching. This action strategy aligns with Recommendation #4 ( Recognize and Respond to Identities in Mentorship ) as well as Recommendation #7 ( Mitigate Negative Mentorship Experiences ) in the Science of Effective Mentorship in STEMM Report ( 2019 ). Recommendation #4 calls on mentors to “reflect on how their biases and prejudices may affect mentees and mentoring relationships” and Recommendation #7 states that “negative mentoring experiences do and will occur, and direct steps should be taken to minimize harm from such occurrences.” Evidently, adoption of these recommendations and the action strategy being posited here requires engaging in deep reflection to gain an understanding of one's biases, unlearning racist socialization about minoritized communities, and, seeing as though this is not a destination that one arrives at, continually staying vigilant about how our biases and stereotypes may present in our mentoring and teaching. Given that this work is ongoing, it is likely that harm will occur again, so actively and promptly addressing any occurrence of anti-Asian hate in STEM is integral to promoting Asian (women) doctoral students’ mental health and STEM persistence. Actionable Strategy #3: Support Asian Women's Engagement in Community Spaces Given that support from Asian peers and community were instrumental in buffering the impact of anti-Asian hate on Asian doctoral women's mental health, STEM graduate advisors and faculty can enact inclusive mentorship by supporting Asian doctoral women's engagement in such community spaces. Participants noted that the workload in STEM programs was a barrier to accessing support when such support was available. This is largely because there was no time to focus on their wellness. Thus, STEM advisors and professors can actively support Asian students’ engagement in community support spaces by being flexible and understanding of students’ need to take the time to access and utilize community support. As observed in our findings, the STEM experience can be lonely and isolating, especially for Asian doctoral women who are witnessing and experiencing microaggressions and violence toward their racial/ethnic groups. So, STEM faculty can also be intentional about cocreating community spaces inside STEM, such as in their research labs or classrooms and openly engage graduate students in affirming and validating conversations about the toll that these acts of hate can be having on their mental health. Actionable Strategy #4: Support Asian Women's Mental Health and Wellness Administrators in STEM must prioritize efforts to provide mental health support and resources. This may include providing outreach and wellness check-ins to Asian/Asian American students when incidents of anti-Asian hate occur. Administrators can also encourage breaks, time off, and taking mental health days so that students can care for themselves and their mental health. Administrators need to also become more familiar with AAPI resources and other mental health services on campuses. This may include having a list of AAPI mental health professionals in surrounding areas and having the contact information to campus counseling centers. Administrators in STEM can also collaboratively establish connections with Asian/Asian American student groups on campus to ensure that their outreach and resources are culturally responsive. CONCLUSION The findings of the current study illuminated how continued adherence to white supremacist beliefs about Asians as the illusory “Yellow Peril” and “Model Minority,” amidst rampant acts of anti-Asian hate, levied deleterious effects on Asian doctoral women's mental health. In doing so, this study took a first step in disrupting the perpetual silence about Asian students, particularly Asian doctoral women, that engulfs many STEM disciplines. Through increased awareness of how gendered racialized hate impacts Asian doctoral women's mental health, and in turn their STEM persistence intentions, we hope that others in STEM continue to dismantle the hegemonic invisibilization of Asian (women) students and foreground their voices and lived experiences in efforts to advance equity in STEM. It is paramount that we not revert to outdated exclusionary and racist practices because they counter our attempts to (re)create a more inclusive, justice-focused, and liberatory STEM milieu that promotes students’ thriving. The ultimate goal of producing impactful science is far more likely when those within STEM are whole and well. Supplementary Material ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was made possible by funding from the University of Massachusetts Boston Institute of Asian American Studies. We greatly appreciate their support. Footnotes 1 Seeing that the practice of capitalizing white as a proper noun is a practice associated with those who condone white supremacy, we have chosen to not capitalize white when discussing race in this paper. Our choice is supported by outlets such as the Associated Press style guide, is consistent with prior published research such as Wilkins-Yel et al., 2023 , and Wilkins-Yel et al., 2024 , and serves to reclaim the humanity of Black and Brown communities. References Alexander, Q. R., &amp; Hermann, M. A. (2016). African-American women's experiences in graduate science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education at a predominantly white university: A qualitative investigation. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 9(4), 307–322. 10.1037/a0039705 Bhamidipati, M., &amp; Goris, T. (2019). The most common misconceptions of employers about Asian females, searching for a position in engineering fields in the United States [Poster presentation ]. Pittsburgh University's 2019 Research Colloquium. Retrieved from https://digitalcommons.pittstate.edu/posters_2019/2 Boveda, M., &amp; Annamma, S. A. (2023). Beyond making a statement: An intersectional framing of the power and possibilities of positioning. Educational Researcher, 52(5), 306–314. 10.3102/0013189X231167149 Braun, V., &amp; Clarke, V. (2023). Thematic analysis. In Cooper H., Coutanche M. N., McMullen L. M., Panter A. T., Rindskopf D., and Sher K. J. (Eds.), APA Handbook of Research Methods in Psychology: Research Designs: Quantitative, Qualitative, Neuropsychological, and Biological (2nd ed., pp. 65–81). American Psychological Association. 10.1037/0000319-004 Bresnahan, M., Zhu, Y., Hooper, A., Hipple, S., &amp; Savoie, L. (2023). The negative health effects of anti-Asian stigma in the U.S. during COVID-19. Stigma and Health, 8(1), 115–123. 10.1037/sah0000375 Budiman, A., &amp; Ruiz, G. N. (2021). Key facts about Asian American, a diverse and growing population. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/04/29/key-facts-about-asian-americans/ Castro, A. R., &amp; Collins, C. S. (2020). Asian American women in STEM in the lab with “White Men Named John. Science Education, 105(1), 33–61. 10.1002/sce.21598 Chae, D. H., Yip, T., Martz, C. D., Chung, K., Richeson, J. A., Hajat, A., ... LaVeist, T. A. (2021). Vicarious racism and vigilance during the COVID-19 pandemic: Mental health implications among Asian and Black Americans. Public Health Reports, 136(4), 508–517. 10.1177/00333549211018675 Chavez, N., &amp; Chen, N. (2022). Atlanta spa shootings: One year later, here's what we know. CNN. Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2022/03/16/us/atlanta-spa-shootings-anniversary/index.html Cheng, H.-L., Kim, H. Y., Reynolds, (Taewon Choi), J. D., Tsong, Y., &amp; Joel Wong, Y. (2021). COVID-19 anti-Asian racism: A tripartite model of collective psychosocial resilience. American Psychologist, 76(4), 627–642. 10.1037/amp0000808 Collins, P. H. (2002). Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment. Routledge. Connell, R. W., &amp; Messerschmidt, J. W. (2005). Hegemonic masculinity: Rethinking the concept. Gender &amp; Society, 19(6), 829–859. 10.1177/089124320527863 Corbin, J., &amp; Strauss, A. (2008). Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory, 3rd ed., Sage. Costello, M., Cheng, L., Luo, F., Hu, H., Liao, S., Vishwamitra, N., ... Okpala, E. (2021). COVID-19: A pandemic of anti-Asian cyberhate. Journal of Hate Studies, 17(1), 108–118. 10.33972/jhs.198 Crenshaw, K. (1991). Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity politics, and violence against Women of Color. Stanford Law Review, 43(6), 1241–1249. 10.2307/1229039 Dam, M. C. (2021). Vietnamese American women in STEM: Negotiating the tension of gender, ethnicity, and generational identity in pharmaceutical sciences . (Publication No. 28645976) [Doctoral dissertation, Azusa Pacific University]. ProQuest Dissertations Publishing. Retrieved from https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/vietnamese-american-women-stem-negotiating/docview/2568602474/se-2 Delgado, R., &amp; Stefancic, J. (2000). Critical Race Theory: The Cutting Edge . Temple University Press. Del Visco, S. (2019). Yellow peril, red scare: Race and communism in National Review. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 42(4), 626–644. 10.1080/01419870.2017.1409900 Endo, R. (2021). Asian/American women scholars, gendered orientalism, and racialized violence: Before, during, and after the 2021 Atlanta Massacre. Cultural Studies, Critical Methodologies, 21(4), 344–350. 10.1177/15327086211014632 Evans, T. M., Bira, L., Gastelum, J. B., Weiss, L. T., &amp; Vanderford, N. L. (2018). Evidence for a mental health crisis in graduate education. Nature Biotechnology, 36(3), 282–284. 10.1038/nbt.4089 Garland, A. F., Lau, A. S., Yeh, M., McCabe, K. M., Hough, R. L., &amp; Landsverk, J. A. (2005). Racial and ethnic differences in utilization of mental health services among high-risk youths. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(7), 1336–1343. 10.1176/appi.ajp.162.7.1336 Gee, C. B., Khera, G. S., Poblete, A. T., Kim, B., &amp; Buchwach, S. Y. (2020). Barriers to mental health service use in Asian American and European American college students. Asian American Journal of Psychology, 11(2), 98–107. 10.1037/aap0000178 Glaser, B. G. (1965). The constant comparative method of qualitative analysis. Social Problems, 12(4), 436–445. 10.1525/sp.1965.12.4.03a00070 Gregor, M. A., Burke, K. A., Campbell-Halfaker, D., Dunn, M. G., &amp; Bhatia, A. (2024). “I need a break or I might quit”: STEM academics’ pandemic experiences. The Counseling Psychologist, 52(1), 88–123. Haft, S. L., &amp; Zhou, Q. (2021). An outbreak of xenophobia: Perceived discrimination and anxiety in Chinese American college students before and during the COVID-19 pandemic. International Journal of Psychology, 56(4), 522–531. 10.1002/ijop.12740 Iftikar, J. S., &amp; Museus, S. D. (2018). On the utility of Asian critical (AsianCrit) theory in the field of education. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 31(10), 935–949. 10.1080/09518398.2018.1522008 Imad, M., Reder, M., &amp; Rose, M. (2023). Recasting the agreements to rehumanize STEM education. Frontiers in Education, 8, 1193477. 10.3389/feduc.2023.1193477 Jiménez, J. (2023). Indiana University student stabbed. The New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/15/us/indiana-university-student-stabbed.html Johnson, D. R. (2011). Women of color in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). New Directions for Institutional Research, 2011(152), 75–85. 10.1002/ir.410 Kang, C., Jo, H., Han, S. W., &amp; Weis, L. (2023). Complexifying Asian American student pathways to STEM majors: Differences by ethnic subgroups and college selectivity. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 16(2), 215–225. 10.1037/dhe0000326 Killpack, T. L., &amp; Melón, L. C. (2016). Toward inclusive STEM classrooms: What personal role do faculty play? CBE Life Sciences Education, 15(3), es3–es3. 10.1187/cbe.16-01-0020 Kincheloe, J. L. (2005). Critical Constructivism Primer. Peter Lang. Kincheloe, J. L., &amp; McLaren, P. (2011). Rethinking critical theory and qualitative research. Key Works in Critical Pedagogy, 285–326. Brill. Hau Lam, J., Le, K., &amp; Parker, L. (2022). In the end, there is no such thing as unconscious racism: CRT/Asian American Crit counterstories by undergraduate students during the pandemic. Cultural Studies, Critical Methodologies, 22(1), 44–52. 10.1177/15327086211054052 Lee, M., Park, I. Y., Park, M., Tran, P. K., Cozier, Y. C., &amp; Hahm, H. C. (2023). COVID-19-related racial discrimination during lockdown and its impact on Asian American women. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 20(16), 6546. Lee, S. S. (2006). Over-represented and de-minoritized: The racialization of Asian Americans in higher education. InterActions: UCLA Journal of Education and Information Studies, 2(2). 10.5070/D422000574 Lei, C., &amp; Huijing, W. (2021). Understanding stereotypes of Chinese international students in a U.S. university: A case study. Educational Research and Development Journal, 24(2), 73–91. Levecque, K., Anseel, F., Beuckelaer, A., Van der Heyden, J., &amp; Gisle, L. (2017). Work organization and mental health problems in PhD students. Research Policy, 46(4), 868–879 . 10.1016/j.respol.2017.02.008 Li, Y., &amp; Nicholson, H. L. (2021). When “model minorities” become “yellow peril” - Othering and the racialization of Asian Americans in the COVID-19 pandemic. Sociology Compass, 15(2), 1–13. 10.1111/soc4.12849 Lin, S. C. (2021). “The modern Mulan of tech": A critical analysis of Asian American women and their experiences in computer science [Doctoral dissertation, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign]. University of Illinois Library. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/2142/110537 Mukkamala, S., &amp; Suyemoto, K. L. (2018). Racialized sexism/sexualized racism: A multimethod study of intersectional experiences of discrimination for Asian American women. Asian American Journal of Psychology, 9(1), 32–46. McGee, E., &amp; Bentley, L. (2017). The equity ethic: Black and Latinx college students reengineering their STEM careers toward justice. American Journal of Education, 124(1), 1–36. 10.1086/693954 McGee, E. (2018). “Black genius, Asian fail”: The detriment of stereotype lift and stereotype threat in high-achieving Asian and Black STEM students. AERA Open, 4(4). 10.1177/2332858418816658 Miles, M. L., Agger, C. A., Roby, R. S., &amp; Morton, T. R. (2022). Who's who: How “women of color” are (or are not) represented in STEM education research. Science Education, 106(2), 229–256. 10.1002/sce.21694 Morrow, S. (2005). Quality and trustworthiness in qualitative research in counseling psychology. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 52(2), 250–260. Mousavi, M. P. S., Sohrabpour, Z., Anderson, E. L., Stemig-Vindedahl, A., Golden, D., Christenson, G., ... Bühlmann, P. (2018). Stress and mental health in graduate school: How student empowerment creates lasting change. Journal of Chemical Education, 95(11), 1939–1946. 10.1021/acs.jchemed.8b00188 Mudambi, A. (2019). South Asian American discourses: Engaging the yellow peril-model minority dialectic. The Howard Journal of Communications, 30(3), 284–298. 10.1080/10646175.2018.1491431 Museus, S. D. (2014). Asian American Students in Higher Education. Routledge. Museus, S. D., &amp; Iftikar, J. (2013). An Asian critical theory (AsianCrit) framework. Asian American Students in Higher Education, 31(10), 18–29. Nagy, G. A., Fang, C. M., Hish, A. J., Kelly, L., Nicchitta, C. V., Dzirasa, K., &amp; Rosenthal, M. Z. (2019). Burnout and mental health problems in biomedical doctoral students. CBE Life Sciences Education, 18(2). 10.1187/cbe.18-09-0198 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2019). The Science of Effective Mentorship in STEMM, ed. Byars-Winston A. and Dahlberg M.L.. The National Academies Press. 10.17226/25568 Okun, T., &amp; Jones, K. (2001). White supremacy culture. Dismantling racism: A workbook for social change groups . Retrieved from https://www.thc.texas.gov/public/upload/preserve/museums/files/White_Supremacy_Culture.pdf Ong, M., Wright, C., Espinosa, L. L., &amp; Orfield, G. (2011). Inside the double bind: A synthesis of empirical research on undergraduate and graduate women of color in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Harvard Educational Review, 81(2), 172–208. 10.17763/haer.81.2.t022245n7x4752v2 Park, J. J., Chuang, Y.-C., &amp; Hald, E. S. (2018). Identifying key influencers of professional identity development of Asian International STEM graduate students in the United States. The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 27(2), 145–154. 10.1007/s40299-018-0373-6 Powless, M. D., Wilkins-Yel, K. G., Li, Y., Lau, P. L., Cheng, J., Wong, Y. J., &amp; Biggers, M. (2022). “[He] gave me a 30-minute lecture on how I was a shitty grad student”: Examining how male faculty can eradicate systemic oppression and support women in STEM. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 17(1), 81–95. 10.1037/dhe0000393 Salam, E. (2023). ‘A life is a life’: Seattle protests death of Indian student hit by police car. The Guardian. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2023/sep/19/seattle-jaahnavi-kandula-south-asian-american-protest Saw, A., Aggie, Yellow, Horse, A., &amp; Jeung, R. (2021). Stop AAPI hate mental health report . Justice Information Center. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/20.500.11990/2268 Sims, G. M., Kia-Keating, M., Sanchez, A., Beylin, N., Evans, M., &amp; Tran, M. (2022). Anti-Asian American discrimination and COVID-19: Living with fear. International Perspectives in Psychology: Research, Practice, Consultation, 11(3), 206–213. 10.1027/2157-3891/a000048 Spencer, M., Chen, J., Gee, G., Fabian, C., &amp; Takeuchi, D. (2010). Discrimination and mental health-related service use in a national study of Asian Americans. American Journal of Public Health, 100(12), 2410–2417. 10.2105/AJPH.2009.176321 SPOKENproject. Finding a way: Reflections on the Atlanta Shootings [Video]. YouTube. Retrieved 14 March 2022. from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tnn6l9sKz_8 Stop AAPI Hate. New report: AAPI women twice as likely to report experiencing incidents of discrimination . Retrieved May 2021. from https://stopaapihate.org/2021/05/20/press-statement-aapi-womens-report/ Stop AAPI Hate. Two years and thousands of voices: What community generated data tells us about anti-AAPI hate . Retrieved March 2022. from https://stopaapihate.org/year-2-report/ Tseng, V., &amp; Lee, R. M. (2021). From margin to center: An Asian Americanist psychology. American Psychologist, 76(4), 693–700. 10.1037/amp0000866 Tu, M. C., &amp; Okazaki, S. (2021). What is career success? A new Asian American psychology of working. American Psychologist, 76(4), 673–688. 10.1037/amp0000807 Welde, K. D., &amp; Laursen, S. L. (2008). The “ideal type” advisor: How advisors help STEM graduate students find their ‘scientific feet’. The Open Education Journal, 1(1), 49–61. 10.2174/1874920800801010049 Wilkins-Yel, K. G., Hyman, J., &amp; Zounlome, N. O. O. (2019). Linking intersectional invisibility and hypervisibility to experiences of microaggressions among graduate women of color in STEM. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 113, 51–61. 10.1016/j.jvb.2018.10.018 Wilkins-Yel, K. G., Bekki, J., Arnold, A., Bernstein, B., Okwu, C., Natarajan, M., &amp; Randall, A. K. (2022). Understanding the impact of personal challenges and advisor support on STEM persistence among graduate women of color. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 15(1), 97–110. 10.1037/dhe0000236 Wilkins-Yel, K. G., Arnold, A., Bekki, J., Natarajan, M., Bernstein, B., &amp; Randall, A. K. (2022). “I can't push off my own mental health”: Chilly STEM climates, mental health, and STEM persistence among Black, Latina, and White graduate women. Sex Roles, 86(3-4), 208–232. 10.1007/s11199-021-01262-1 Wilkins-Yel, K.G., Delaney, T., Gamio Cuervo, Á., Zounlome, N. O. &amp; Sparks, P.D. (2024) Examining how graduate advisors mitigate or exacerbate the structural barriers Women of Color navigate in STEM doctoral programs. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 17 (15) 719–733. 10.1037/dhe0000452. Wilkins‐Yel, K. G., Williamson, F. A., Priddie, C., Cross Francis, D., Gallimore, S. &amp; Davis‐Randolph, J. L. (2023) A site of radical possibilities: Examining how a multigenerational counterspace promoted STEM persistence among undergraduate Women of Color. Journal of Research and Science Teaching, 60(311) 268–303 10.1002/tea.21798. Wu, L., &amp; Jing, W. (2011). Asian women in STEM careers: An invisible minority in a double bind. Issues in Science and Technology, 28(1), 82–87. Yao, C. W., &amp; Mwangi, C. A. G. (2022). Yellow peril and cash cows: The social positioning of Asian international students in the USA. Higher Education, 84, 1027–1044. 10.1007/s10734-022-00814-y Yip, T., Cheah, C. S. L., Kiang, L., &amp; Hall, G. C. N. (2021). Rendered invisible: Are Asian Americans a model or a marginalized minority? American Psychologist, 76(4), 575–581. 10.1037/amp0000857 Yoo, H. C., Miller, M. J., &amp; Yip, P. (2015). Validation of the internalization of the Model Minority Myth Measure (IM-4) and its link to academic performance and psychological adjustment among Asian American adolescents. Cultural Diversity &amp; Ethnic Minority Psychology, 21(2), 237–246. 10.1037/a0037648 Yu, J. (2022). A Critical Study of Chinese International Students’ Experiences of Race and Racism in the Age of COVID-19 (Publication No. 29254281) [Doctoral Dissertation, University of California, Santa Barbara]. ProQuest Dissertations Publishing. Retrieved from https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/critical-study-chinese-international-students/docview/2707596362/se-2 Zheng, J., Lue, K., Lo, P., &amp; Park, J. J. (2024). “We are the majority”: An AsianCrit perspective of the racialized experiences of Asian American college students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 10.1037/dhe0000562 Zhou, S., Banawa, R., &amp; Oh, H. (2023). Stop Asian hate: The mental health impact of racial discrimination among Asian Pacific Islander young and emerging adults during COVID-19. Journal of Affective Disorders, 325, 346–353. 10.1016/j.jad.2022.12.132 Associated Data Supplementary Materials