pmc Int J Neuropsychopharmacol Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2689 ijneuro ijnp International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology 1461-1457 1469-5111 Oxford University Press PMC11814688 PMC11814688.1 11814688 11814688 10.1093/ijnp/pyae059.209 pyae059.209 1 Posters AcademicSubjects/MED00415 AcademicSubjects/SCI01870 REPURPOSING CANDESARTAN, THE ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUG, FOR TREATMENT OF BIPOLAR DISORDER Park *Johnny (Chun Hui) Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Ashton Melanie Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Hope Judy Monash University, Eastern Health and Centre of Mental Health Education and Research at Delmont Private Hospital , Melbourne, VIC, Australia Ng Chee The Melbourne Clinic, Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, 130 Church St , Richmond, Australia Hopwood Malcolm Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, Professorial Psychiatry Unit, Albert Road Clinic , Melbourne, Australia Khoo Jon-Paul Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane QLD, Australia Malhi Gin Discipline of Psychiatry, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney , Sydney, Australia CADE Clinic, Department of Psychiatry, Royal North Shore Hospital, St. Leonards, Australia Fernandes Brisa Center for Precision Health, School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston , Houston, TX, USA Gwini Stella May University Hospital Geelong, Department of Research, Geelong , Victoria, Australia Amerena John University Hospital Geelong , Geelong, VIC Suppes Trisha Bipolar and Depression Research Program, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, 3801 Miranda Avenue ( Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, 401 Quarry Road , Stanford, CA9 4305, USA Chatterton Mary Lou Monash University, Eastern Health and Centre of Mental Health Education and Research at Delmont Private Hospital , Melbourne, VIC, Australia Williams Lana Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Walker Adam Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Turner Alyna Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Carvalho Andre Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Nierenberg Andrew The Dauten Family Center for Bipolar Treatment Innovation, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School , Boston, MA, USA Moriaty Emily Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Kessing Lars Copenhagen Affective Disorders Research Centre (CADIC), Psychiatric Center Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, and Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences University of Copenhagen, 6243, Rigshospitalet. Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark Mohebbi Mohammedreza Biostatistics Unit, Faculty of Health, Deakin University , Burwood, Australia Dodd Seetal Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Moylan Steven Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Segal Jose Monash University, Eastern Health and Centre of Mental Health Education and Research at Delmont Private Hospital , Melbourne, VIC, Australia Tiller John Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, Professorial Psychiatry Unit, Albert Road Clinic , Melbourne, Australia King Joel The Melbourne Clinic, Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, 130 Church St , Richmond, Australia Couper Jeremy Monash University, Eastern Health and Centre of Mental Health Education and Research at Delmont Private Hospital , Melbourne, VIC, Australia Kim Jee Hyun Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Florey Institute for Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Melbourne , Parkville, Australia Dean Olivia Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Florey Institute for Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Melbourne , Parkville, Australia Berk Michael Deakin University, IMPACT - the Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Barwon Health , Geelong, Australia Florey Institute for Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Melbourne , Parkville, Australia Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne , Parkville, Australia Orygen, National Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental Health, Parkville, Australia T), Palo Alto, CA, 94304, USA 2 2025 12 2 2025 28 Suppl 1 481958 35th CINP World Congress Neuropsychopharmacology 23-26 May 2024 Abstracts i121 i122 12 02 2025 13 02 2025 13 02 2025 © The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP. 2025 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ ), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information please contact journals.permissions@oup.com. Abstract Background The depressive phase of bipolar disorder lasts longer than the manic phase and poses the highest risk due to its negative impact on quality of life and mental health, and peak in suicide attempts. Unfortunately, current therapies for bipolar disorder are far more efficacious in mania than depression, suggesting an urgent need for new and improved therapies for bipolar depression. The literature suggests the chronic presence of low-grade peripheral and central inflammation is a key pathophysiology of depression. In particular, Angiotensin II Type I receptor (AT1R) of the renin-angiotensin system appears to play a critical role in activating the relevant stress, oxidative stress and inflammatory pathways (see Vian et al., 2017, for review). In support of this, cutting-edge genomic studies (e.g. Kidnapillai et al., 2020), findings from animal models of bipolar disorder (e.g. Luo et al., 2020), independent large-scale epidemiological studies (e.g. Johansen et al., 2012) and a meta-analysis (Brownstein et al., 2018) have collectively nominated agents that reduce AT1R activity as a potential novel therapy for depression. Thus, our team designed clinical trials using candesartan, a common anti-hypertensive medication and AT1R blocker, to target this major unmet need in depression. Aims &amp; Objectives The clinical trials aim to investigate the efficacy of adjunctive candesartan versus placebo for the treatment of major depression in unipolar and bipolar disorder. To achieve this aim, two separate trials are run in parallel for participants with either bipolar disorder or major depressive disorder. The two streams are: The Candesartan Adjunctive Bipolar Depression Trial (CADET-BD) and The Candesartan Adjunctive Major Depression Trial (CADET-UD). These trials are the first study of this agent in bipolar and major depressive disorder and will provide important proof-of-principle of the role of the angiotensin system in mood regulation. The primary outcome will measure if candesartan is superior to placebo in reducing depressive symptoms. The secondary outcomes will measure weather candesartan is superior to placebo in reducing anxiety symptoms, inflammatory biomarkers, and improving quality of life, social and work function and cognition. Method Funded by National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) and Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF), the CADET trials are both 16-week multi-site double-blind randomized placebo-controlled trials and will aim to recruit 240 participants each (i.e. bipolar depression and unipolar depression). The trials are being conducted at five sites in Australia and each site is equipped with a team of Research Assistants and Principal Investigators to assess participants for inclusion (e.g. moderate to severe depression indexed by a depression rating scale score of 20 or higher), exclusion (e.g. a diagnosis of another psychotic disorder assessed using the SCID-5-RV) and withdrawal criteria, and conduct participant interviews. The participant will first attend the screen visit, followed by six visits within the 16 weeks, either in-person or via telehealth. The participants will complete different sets of tasks at each visit (Figure 1). Results, Discussion &amp; Conclusion The trials are double-blinded and currently recruiting participants. The results, discussion and conclusion will be available once the recruitment is complete. References Brownstein, D.J., Salagre, E., Kö hler, C., Stubbs, B., Vian, J., Pereira, C., Chavarria, V., Karmakar, C., Turner, A., Quevedo, J. and Carvalho, A.F., 2018. Blockade of the angiotensin system improves mental health domain of quality of life: A meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Australian &amp;New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 52(1), pp.24-38. Kidnapillai, S., Bortolasci, C.C., Udawela, M., Panizzutti, B., Spolding, B., Connor, T., Sanigorski, A., Dean, O.M., Crowley, T., Jamain, S. and Gray, L., 2020. The use of a gene expression signature and connectivity map to repurpose drugs for bipolar disorder. The World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 21(10), pp.775- 783. Luo, H., Wu, P.F., Cao, Y., Jin, M., Shen, T.T., Wang, J., Huang, J.G., Han, Q.Q., He, J.G., Deng, S.L. and Ni, L., 2020. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor rapidly ameliorates depressive-type behaviors via bradykinin-dependent activation of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1. Biological Psychiatry, 88 (5), pp.415-425. Johansen, A., Holmen, J., Stewart, R. and Bjerkeset, O., 2012. Anxiety and depression symptoms in arterial hypertension: the influence of antihypertensive treatment. The HUNT study, Norway. European journal of epidemiology, 27, pp.63-72. Vian, J., Pereira, C., Chavarria, V., Kö hler, C., Stubbs, B., Quevedo, J., Kim, S.W., Carvalho, A.F., Berk, M. and Fernandes, B.S., 2017. The renin– angiotensin system: a possible new target for depression. BMC medicine, 15, pp.1-13. bipolar depression clinical trial angiotensin unipolar depression pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement no pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY-NC