pmc Educ Inf Technol (Dordr) Educ Inf Technol (Dordr) 3814 phenaturepg Education and Information Technologies 1360-2357 1573-7608 pmc-is-collection-domain yes pmc-collection-title Springer Nature - PMC COVID-19 Collection PMC10131495 PMC10131495.1 10131495 10131495 37361792 10.1007/s10639-023-11755-z 11755 1 Article Examining the Effects of the Utility Value Intervention on Learners’ Emotions and Conceptual Understanding in Online Video-based Learning Ha Seunghye http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1713-9653 So Hyo-Jeong hyojeongso@ewha.ac.kr grid.255649.9 0000 0001 2171 7754 Department of Educational Technology, Ewha Womans University, 52, Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 03760 Korea 26 4 2023 434336 1 28 11 8 2022 22 3 2023 26 04 2023 27 04 2023 27 06 2023 © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023, Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law. This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted research re-use and secondary analysis in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic. In asynchronous online video-based learning, learners experience various affective states, which may make them disengaged and negatively influence learning outcomes. This study aimed to examine the effect of the utility value (UV) intervention to help learners emotionally and behaviorally engage in online learning. The UV intervention includes pre-learning writing activity and UV feedback messages to help learners perceive the relevance between the lecture topic and their lives. In particular, we examined the effects of the UV intervention on learners’ negative emotions (i.e., confusion, frustration, and boredom) and conceptual understanding. For the experiment, 30 Korean adult learners were randomly assigned to the control, feedback-only, and writing-feedback groups. The control group did not receive any UV intervention strategy. The feedback-only group received UV feedback messages when detected to experience negative emotions during learning. The writing-feedback group performed a pre-learning activity to write about the usefulness of the lecture topic and then received UV feedback messages during learning. We used Ekman’s Facial Action Coding System (FACS) to analyze learners’ facial expressions associated with negative emotions. Pre-test and post-test were administered to measure conceptual understanding. The findings revealed that the UV feedback messages significantly reduced the occurrence of boredom while the UV writing did not significantly improve conceptual understanding. Overall, this study suggests that additional strategies and longer timing in UV interventions are necessary to intervene in online learners’ confusion and frustration. Implications are discussed regarding the design of affective feedback mechanisms in online video-based learning environments. Keywords Academic emotion Facial expression Affective feedback Utility value intervention Online video-based learning National Research Foundation of Korea NRF-2018S1A5A8030048 So Hyo-Jeong pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf yes pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement no pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes Introduction With the outbreak of COVID-19 and the closure of physical schools, institutions have widely adopted asynchronous online video-based learning in various learning contexts to overcome the constraints of learning space and time. Yet, the anytime-anyplace claims underlying flexible online learning environments have been criticized since such claims often assume learners are self-directed and autonomous (Houlden &amp; Veletsianos, 2019 ). Since learners in online video-based learning are fully responsible for regulating their emotions, they tend to experience various affective states that may negatively influence learning processes and outcomes (Lee et al., 2021 ). Although it is natural to go through several affective states during the learning process, some negative emotions, such as confusion, frustration, and boredom, may have detrimental effects on motivation and performance. As such, it is important to detect and intervene in negative emotions in order to help learners not fall into a vicious cycle where they are disengaged in learning for a long time (Baker et al., 2010 ). To design effective interventions, it is essential to understand the sources or antecedents that make online learners experience negative emotions. Emotion is multi-dimensional and involves both cognitive and motivational processes (Pekrun, 2006 ). Learners may experience negative emotions because they have cognitive difficulty understanding concepts. In other cases, learners’ negative emotions can be caused by a lack of motivation to learn such as lacking interest in the learning topic. In the existing literature, emotional problems caused by cognitive difficulties have been resolved by cognitive feedback approaches such as providing additional resources and automated answers to help learners escape from cognitive disequilibrium (D’Mello &amp; Graesser, 2012 ). In contrast, motivational approaches attempt to influence learners’ extrinsic and intransitive motivation, thereby increasing the enjoyment of learning and task engagement (Hulleman et al., 2017 ). Value is a component that has been widely investigated as a motivational strategy to influence academic emotions and performance (Hulleman et al., 2016 ; Pekrun et al., 2011 ). Two theories inform the critical role of value in learning. First, the expectancy-value theory (Eccles &amp; Wigfield, 2002 ) is useful to understand the role of value, especially in learning motivation and achievement. This theory posits that expectancies for success and subjective task values determine learners’ interest and performance. In particular, learners’ perceptions of utility value have been reported to have an association with achievement (Canning et al., 2018 ; Hulleman et al., 2021). Second, the control-value theory (Pekrun, 2006 ) adopts the assumptions from the expectancy-value theory and provides an integrative framework for analyzing and understanding emotions in academic contexts. This theory addresses the issue of academic emotions through two appraisals—control and value. Control refers to the perceived causal influence over the learning process and outcomes, such as the belief that one’s efforts will lead to learning. Value refers to the perceived valence of action and outcomes, such as the meaning learners attribute to performing specific learning tasks. Depending on value appraisals (e.g., value of success or failure), learners may experience hopelessness, anxiety, or relief. Drawing from these theoretical perspectives, we posit that when learners perceive the utility value of their learning tasks, they are more emotionally and behaviorally engaged in online learning, which in turn enhances overall emotional experiences and cognitive learning outcomes. Our utility value (UV) intervention includes two components (pre-learning and during-learning) to help learners better perceive the relevance of learning tasks. The first component is a pre-learning task in that learners write a short essay to make connections between the course topic and their lives. UV writing has been reported as a simple but cost-effective way to engage and motivate learners, especially those who are academically under-achieving (Hulleman et al., 2016 ; Johnson &amp; Sinatra, 2013 ). The second component is a during-learning intervention to deliver utility feedback messages when online learners are detected to experience negative emotions. Affective feedback, which is a system-level feedback that detects and controls learners’ emotional states through affective interventions, has been researched mainly in the area of Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) (Malekzadeh et al., 2015 ; Robison et al., 2009 ). In affective feedback mechanisms, affect is both the target to control or manipulate as well as the content to deliver (e.g., prompt containing empathy). While UV interventions have been extensively examined in face-to-face classroom settings, little is known about their effect in online learning situations. Further, the function of affective feedback beyond ITS contexts was rarely explored, which implies the need for further investigation of its effect in different learning contexts. Against this backdrop, this study aims to investigate the effect of the UV intervention on affective aspects (learners’ confusion, frustration, boredom) and cognitive aspects (conceptual understanding) in online video-based learning through an experimental study with Korean adult learners. Overall, the following research questions guided the current research: How does the utility value intervention affect the occurrence of learners’ negative emotions (i.e., confusion, frustration, and boredom) during online video-based learning? How does the utility value intervention affect learners’ conceptual understanding of the learning topic in online video-based learning? How do learners perceive the effects of the utility value intervention on their affective states during online video-based learning? This paper is structured as follows. We first present theoretical backgrounds that informed the present study such as the role of emotions in learning, affective feedback, and UV interventions as well as studies on learner emotions in the technology-enhanced learning (TEL) literature. In methods, we explained the experiment with 30 adult learners who were assigned to one of the three groups: control, feedback-only, and writing-feedback. Data analyzed from learners’ facial expressions and interviews are presented to answer the proposed research questions. Finally, the paper concludes with the interpretations of key findings and draws implications to inform future practices and research that aim to help learners regulate negative emotions in online video-based learning situations. Theoretical background Functions of emotion in Learning While emotions were traditionally considered separate from cognition, scholars reported an intricate relationship between emotion and learning (Pekrun, 2006 ). In the existing literature, several terms such as affect, emotion, and mood are used interchangeably to refer to the same physiological phenomenon (Linnenbrink, 2006 ). In general, affect is a broad term that refers to the feelings that we experience in our life and includes both moods and emotions (Forgas, 2001 ; Gross, 2015 ). Affect can be both traits and states. According to the framework of affective processes by Rosenberg ( 1998 ), affective traits are stable dispositions toward certain emotional responses whereas affective states are less stable over time. Affective states include moods and emotions. In terms of duration, moods last relatively longer without a particular referent whereas emotions are short and intense states often caused by specific events. In essence, emotions are multi-dimensional and are closely related to cognitive, behavioral, motivational, and physiological processes (Gläser-Zikuda, 2012 ; Pekrun, 2006 ). Based on the existing literature, this study views affect as a broad term that includes emotions. The term affective state is also used to emphasize the nature of short and intense emotional experiences in learning. Concerning the function of emotion in learning, Pekrun ( 1992 ) examined the influences of emotion on cognition and learning and suggested four possible paths by which emotion influences students’ learning and achievement. The first three paths are cognitive effects, while the last one describes motivational effects. First, emotion influences information storage and retrieval because learning depends on mood states. The unity of the contents of the learning material and mood enhances information retrieval. Second, emotion influences information processing strategies. A positive mood may facilitate holistic, creative thinking, whereas a negative mood may induce an analytic way of processing information. Third, emotion influences intellectual performance when emotion consumes attentional resources. Test anxiety, for example, occupies the capacity of the working memory, thus leaving fewer resources available for completing complex cognitive tasks. Fourth, emotion influences learners’ intrinsic and extrinsic task motivation. Enjoyment of task performance induces positive intrinsic motivation, whereas negative emotions such as anxiety, anger, or sadness reduce task enjoyment. Boredom may influence learners’ motivation to avoid certain tasks and engage in other tasks instead. Emotions also influence the extrinsic motivation of task completion, often related to prospective or retrospective outcomes. Pekrun ( 1992 ) argued that while researchers have well-studied the cognitive effects of emotions on learning, such as test anxiety, they have largely neglected motivational the mechanisms of emotions, which require more investigation. Based on the synthesis of prior research, this study mainly focuses on confusion, frustration, and boredom. A model of affective dynamics during complex learning by D’Mello and Graesser ( 2012 ) helps understand the intricate relationship between these three emotions and their occurrences. As illustrated in Fig. 1 , cognitive disequilibrium occurs when learners face unfamiliar concepts. As learning inevitably involves cognitive disequilibrium, confusion is somewhat necessary for the learning process (D’Mello &amp; Graesser, 2012 ). However, when the disequilibrium persists without reaching equilibrium, confusion may transit into frustration. Frustration is a type of emotion that learners experience when they make mistakes repeatedly, are blocked from accomplishing an important goal, or face ongoing difficulties (Kapoor et al., 2007 ; Stein &amp; Levine, 1990 ). Solving frustration returns learners to a state of confusion or engagement. But when frustration persists, it may cause boredom, a sign of disengagement. Therefore, instructional design should provide timely interventions to prevent learners from disengagement caused by boredom, confusion, and frustration. Emotions in Technology-enhanced learning environments As summarized in Table 1 , several researchers have examined the types of emotions that learners experience in technology-enhanced learning (TEL) environments, including online learning and MOOCs. In online learning environments, the types of emotions that learners experience are more diverse than those in face-to-face learning situations (Moneta &amp; Kekkonone-Moneta, 2007 ). This is due to the unique characteristics of online learning environments, including familiarity with learning technology, isolation from peers and instructors, and the lack of interaction, social presence, and emotional support (Harnett et al., 2016 ). The study by Baker et al. ( 2010 ) is instrumental in understanding the nature of critical emotions needing intervention. The study examined students’ affective states in three different environments (i.e., dialogue tutor, game, and ITS). They found that boredom and confusion were persistent across these three TELs. Boredom was significantly related to poor learning performance. With that, Baker et al. argued that it is important to detect boredom and to provide relevant intervention strategies to prevent a bored student to remain disengaged for a long time. In a selective meta-analysis, D’Mello ( 2013 ) analyzed the types of emotions reported in the TELs literature, such as serious games, ITS, and simulations. This meta-analysis noted that flow and engagement were frequently found in all studies while the occurrence of boredom, confusion, curiosity, happiness, and frustration varied across studies. D’Mello suggested that boredom, confusion, and frustration are essential to detect and provide affect-sensitive strategies through advanced learning technologies. With the increasing adoption of MOOCs in formal and non-formal learning settings, recent studies examined learners’ emotions in MOOCs environments. Dillion et al. (2016) found that the most frequently reported emotions by MOOCs learners were hope, enjoyment, and contentment, i.e., primarily positive experiences. They also found a significant relationship between negative emotions, (e.g., anxiety, confusion, and frustration) and dropout rates. Based on the control-value theory, Buhr et al. ( 2019 ) examined whether cognitive appraisals influence MOOC learners’ enjoyment and boredom. Through the structural modeling with data from 926 MOOC learners, they found that learners who perceived more control and value reported more enjoyment and less boredom. They attributed this finding to the flexible nature of MOOCs environments where learners have the freedom to start and complete the course material. The study by Ding and Zhao ( 2020 ) provides insights into what kinds of emotions can predict learners’ engagement with videos and assignments in a small private online course (SPOC), a localized MOOC in China. The overall findings indicate that positive emotions like enjoyment and excitement positively predicted engagement while negative emotions like boredom and annoyance negatively predicted engagement. Interestingly, the study found that confusion, which was posited as a negative emotion, did not predict engagement. The researchers explained that confusion is an affective state that is context-dependent, which makes it complex to see clear effects on learner engagement. Confusion can be a positive emotion by creating opportunities for learners to resolve cognitive difficulties (D’Mello &amp; Graesser, 2012 ). A similar view on confusion was observed by Liu et al. ( 2022 ), which aimed to develop an automatic mechanism to detect emotional and cognitive engagement in MOOCs. The researchers viewed confusion as an intermediate state between positive and negative emotions. Thus, their classification of emotions in the automatic detection includes three categories (positive, confusion, and negative) where confusion was considered an emotion that does not belong to either the negative or the positive category. Analyzing emotions Analyzing learners’ emotional states precedes providing timely interventions. However, emotions are extremely challenging to analyze because of inherent variants such as gender, age, culture, time, and personality (D’Mello et al., 2009 ). Researchers have used diverse analytical methods to overcome this inherent challenge and to improve accuracy in emotion detection and analysis (Craig et al., 2008 ). Self-report and facial expressions are two core methods for analyzing emotions in learning situations (Baker et al., 2010 ). First, self-report requires learners to judge and express their emotions, including self-reported questionnaires such as the AEQ (Academic Emotions Questionnaire) by Pekrun et al. ( 2011 ). This method relies on subjects’ judgement as a source of emotion analysis. Another example of self-reporting is the emote-aloud method, in which learners verbalize their emotional states during learning processes. The emote-aloud method is a variation of the think-aloud protocol and enables researchers to analyze emotions in a real-time setting (D’Mello et al., 2006 ). Despite such advantages, emotion analysis through self-reporting has limitations in that it lacks objective evidence and depends solely on the subjects’ judgement. Second, recent studies have focused on objective data, such as physiological data and facial expressions, to detect affective states. Grounded on Ekman’s ( 1992 ) Facial Action Coding System (FACS), which posits facial expressions as universal. FACS provides 46 action units (AUs), representing facial muscles’ movements associated with certain emotions. Table 2 summarizes studies showing correlations between negative emotions (e.g., confusion, frustration, and boredom) and specific AUs. For instance, Craig et al. ( 2008 ) analyzed five college students’ emotional states during their interaction with the ITS using the emote-aloud protocol and the analysis of facial expressions. They found correlations between confusion and AU4 (brow lowerer), AU7 (lid tightener), and AU12 (lip corner puller, while frustration was related to AU1 (outer brow raiser) and AU3 (inner brow raiser). In addition, they found a relationship between boredom and AU43 (eye closure). Similarly, D’Mello et al. ( 2009 ) used the emote-aloud method and facial expression analysis to examine learners’ emotions while interacting with the ITS. The study found correlations between confusion and AU4 (brow lowerer) and AU7 (lid tightener), frustration related to AU14 (dimpler), and boredom to AU43 (eye closure). They also reported that boredom was a complex emotion to analyze through clear AUs as it is often not expressed through visible facial expressions. As an example of research conducted in Asian contexts, Lee et al. ( 2021 ) investigated Korean adult learners’ facial expressions during online video-based learning. Their study revealed correlations between AU4 (brow lowerer) and AU12 (lip corner puller) with confusion, and a correlation between AU1 (inner brow raiser) and frustration. Unlike the previous studies conducted in the Western context that reported the difficulty of detecting boredom through facial expressions, Lee et al. ( 2021 ) found that boredom is related to AU14 (dimpler), AU41 (lid droop), and AU45 (blink). The conflicting result indicates the need for more cross-cultural research to examine differences in affective states between Western and Eastern learners. Affective feedback Affective (or affect-aware) feedback is system-level feedback that detects and controls learners’ emotional states through affective interventions (Robison et al., 2009 ). ITS environments provide learners with affective feedback messages conveying empathy, praise, and encouragement through interaction with intelligent tutors or agents to control learners’ affective states (Feidakis et al., 2014 ; Grawemeyer et al., 2015 ). Jiménez et al. ( 2018 ) found that affective feedback influences learners’ emotions, particularly effectively in motivating low-achieving learners. Providing motivational messages as affective feedback can alleviate learners’ frustrations. Based on attribution theory, Rajendran et al. ( 2019 ) designed motivational messages such as praising learners’ efforts, attributing the result to the identified cause, and showing empathy for failure to respond to learners’ frustrations in the ITS. They found that motivational messages significantly reduced instances of learners’ frustration. While the effect of affective feedback reported in the literature has been largely positive, some studies reported that affective feedback was not effective in improving learning gains compared to cognitive feedback. For example, Cabestrero et al. ( 2018 ) found that feedback was the most effective when the message did not contain emotional content. In addition, affective feedback did not influence students’ achievement while cognitive feedback (e.g., hint) was effective. They explained that students perceived the pop-up message displaying emotional content as a distracting element. They also suggested the need to personalize the content of affective feedback to make it relevant to students. Similarly, Grawemeyer et al. ( 2017 ) developed the ITS system called Talk2Learn and provided affect-aware feedback, which adapted feedback based on students’ affective states. They found that while low-achieving students benefited more from the affect-aware feedback, learning gains were not significantly different between the affect-aware and non-affect conditions. On the whole, these previous studies suggest the need for further research on the influence of affective feedback on learning and designing effective feedback mechanisms. In previous studies, messages in affective feedback were mainly reactive to learners’ emotions. For example, when a learner expresses a particular emotion, the system presents a feedback message to show empathy, compliment, or encouragement to the learner (Grawemeyer et al., 2017 ; Robinson et al., 2009). In this study, we focus on a type of affective feedback that delivers the utility value of the learning topic in the feedback message to help students establish the relevance and usefulness of learning. Utility Value Interventions We need to consider sources of emotion in designing affective feedback mechanisms that assist learners in transitioning to desirable affective states. This study focused on learners’ appraisal of value over learning as an affective feedback mechanism. Expectancy-value theory of motivation, Wigfield and Eccles ( 2000 ) suggested four components of task value: attainment, intrinsic, utility, and cost. Among these four values, previous research found that utility value interventions, which are designed to help students make connections between the content they are learning and their lives effectively enhanced learners’ interest in learning and academic achievement (Canning et al., 2018 ; Curry et al., 2020 ; Rosenzweig et al., 2019 ). As shown in Fig. 2 , Gaspard et al. ( 2015 ; 2017 ) suggested four facets of utility value that refer to short-term- and long-term goals as well as various life domains. Utility for short-term goals includes a utility for school (the usefulness related to current and future education), a utility for daily life (the usefulness related to daily routines and leisure activities), and social utility (the usefulness of knowledge accepted by peers). Utility for jobs is a relatively long-term goal that refers to the usefulness related to future career opportunities. As depicted in Fig. 3 , the logic of UV interventions involves both psychological and behavioral mechanisms, which work in tandem with. Perceived relevance or usefulness of learning tasks helps learners develop psychological engagement such as enduring interest in the topic and behavioral engagement such as increased attendance and decreased off-task behaviors (Hulleman &amp; Harackiewicz, 2021 ). One simple and cost-effective way to regulate utility values is to ask students to write or read about the utility value of course topics to their life and goals (Johnson &amp; Sinatra, 2013 ). In a study by Timothy ( 2018 ), the researcher asked college students to write about the relevance between geometry and life. This study revealed that compared to the control group, the group provided with the UV intervention showed greater affective engagement and achievement. Hulleman et al. ( 2017 ) suggest that the UV writing activity was particularly effective for low-achieving students as the writing activity to make connections increased their expectancy to perform well in the course. Thus far, UV interventions have been mainly implemented in face-to-face course situations where learners can interact with instructors and classmates. We located only one study that examined the UV intervention in online learning settings. Rosenzweig et al. ( 2019 ) investigated the effect of UV interventions in online high-school math courses. Their invention includes both UV essay writing and evaluating UV quotes to engage learners to see the relevance of the topic to their lives. The study, however, failed to replicate the benefits of essay-based UV intervention and attributed intervention timing and dosage, which were shorter than in classroom situations, as potential reasons for the conflicting results. Research Method Participants The participants of this study were 30 Korean adult learners (12 men, 18 women) aged between 20−35 years old. The sample included 10 participants in the 20–24 years old, 14 participants in the 25–29 years old, and 6 participants in the 30–35 years old. Regarding educational backgrounds, the participants included 16 undergraduate students, seven college graduates, and seven graduate students. They were randomly assigned to three groups. To recruit participants via convenience sampling, we posted an advertisement that specified the purpose and process of the study, the reward, and the requirements such as the age range and no prior knowledge about big data analysis and SPSS modeler, which was the topic of the video lecture used in this study. We chose big data analysis as the lecture topic because it is relevant to evoke utility values due to its relevance to our life and work. The experiment was conducted after receiving IRB approval from the researcher’s institution. Participants completed the experiment individually and received about USD 25 upon completion of the experimental session. Utility value intervention design The video lecture used in the experiment was taken from the introductory course about big data analysis in the K-MOOC platform. The video lecture is about 26 min long and introduces the concept of clustering and clustering techniques where the instructor explains the key ideas of clustering in big data analysis and demonstrated how to conduct clustering using SPSS Modeler 17.0. Following the logic of the UV intervention in Fig. 3, the UV intervention designed in this study includes two strategies to help learners better perceive the relevance and usefulness of the lecture material. First, we designed a writing task as an antecedent strategy to engage learners. As discussed earlier, writing or reading about the utility value of a learning topic is a relatively simple intervention for helping learners make connections between the course material and their lives (Hulleman et al., 2017 ; Rosenzweig et al., 2019 ). Participants in the writing-feedback group received the following prompt before taking a video lecture: “ The topic of today’s lecture video is big data. Write how big data relates to your life within 250 words”. They were given about 10 min to complete this writing activity. Second, we designed UV feedback messages to help learners engage in the video lecture during the learning process. The design of UV feedback messages was based on Gaspard et al.’s ( 2015 ; 2017 ) classification: utility for daily life, job, school, and social utility. Since our study focused on adult learners, we changed ‘utility for school’ to ‘utility for membership groups’ (e.g., college and workplace). The four types of UV messages designed in this study are (a) utility for daily life (e.g., Data analysis is closely related to our lives. Let’s try a little harder!), (b) utility for jobs (e.g., Data analytics is a competency required by various jobs. Let’s study hard until the end!), (c) utility for membership groups (e.g., Data analysis can be useful at school or work. Shall we do our best to study?), and (d) social utility (e.g., Data analysis is a good topic for conversations with people from different disciplines. You are doing very well!). Participants in the feedback-only and writing-feedback groups received these UV messages when they were detected to experience negative emotions during online learning. Experiment setting and Procedure As Fig. 4 illustrates, the experiment included three steps: Step 1- introduction and pre-test (10 min), Step 2 - online video-based learning (26 to 39 min), and Step 3 - post-test and recall stimulus interview (30 min). Using the random number generator, we placed the participants in a control group or two experimental groups (feedback-only or writing−feedback). The control group did not receive any intervention strategy. The feedback-only group received UV feedback messages when detected experiencing negative emotions during watching the video lecture. The writing−feedback group performed an additional task, which was to write about the utility value of big data analysis within 250 words before watching the video lecture, in addition to receiving UV feedback messages. After completing the online session, the participants completed the post-test and the recall stimulus interview. We conducted the Wizard of Oz (WoZ) experiment (Grawemeyer et al., 2015 ) in a quiet room where the participants interacted with the online video-based learning system controlled by the researchers (see Fig. 5 ). Using the emote-aloud protocol, we asked the participants to verbalize their emotional states while taking the video lecture. Then, in a separate room, the researchers listened to their verbalizations and sent out online UV feedback messages when the verbalizations included words related to boredom, confusion, and frustration (see Fig. 6 ). For this, we did a corpus grouping respective to each emotion before the WoZ experiment (i.e., “I want to stop” means boredom). Data Collection and Analysis For data collection, we collected facial expressions, verbal data from the emote-aloud protocol, and pre-test and post-test scores for conceptual understanding. In this study, learners’ facial expressions are viewed as the indicator of emotional and behavioral engagement during online learning whereas conceptual understanding was viewed as the indicator of academic achievement in short-term learning. First, we used the Morae Recorder (TechSmith, 2012 ) program to capture the facial expressions of each participant during the session. Then, the Multimodal Analysis Video (O’Halloran, 2011 ) program was used to analyze facial expression data based on the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) that specifies 46 action units (AUs) representing facial muscles’ movements (Ekman &amp; Friesen, 1978 ). One of the researchers (the first author) was trained to use FACS for data analysis. In total, we collected 1,657 AUs from the facial recordings of 30 participants. Among those, we excluded 543 AUs that lasted less than three seconds as transient emotions. When more than one type of emotion co-occurred, they were counted as one occurrence. Through this process, 1,109 AUs were selected for the final set of analyses. To identify confusion, frustration, and boredom, we used the framework of AUs identified by Lee et al. ( 2021 ), which was conducted in a similar context with Korean learners (see Table 2 for the respective AUs). That is, AU 4 and AU 12 detected confusion while AU 1 detected frustration. AUs related to boredom were AU 14, AU 41, and AU45. To ensure reliability, the same researcher analyzed the data twice with an interval of one week. The intra-rater reliability (Cohen’s Kappa) was 0.92, which is high and acceptable. Next, we administered the pre-test and post-test to examine whether the UV intervention improved learners’ conceptual understanding of the learning topic (i.e., big data analysis). The test included five multiple-choice questions developed by the researcher and a big data expert based on the lecture materials. For data analysis, we performed descriptive statistics, correlation analysis, one-way ANOVA, and multivariate ANOVA using the SPSS 26.0 program at the significance level of 0.05. We compared the frequency of negative emotions between the three groups to understand the effect of the UV intervention on mediating negative emotions. In addition, we analyzed the patterns of emotional changes before and after receiving UV feedback messages to understand the effect of the UV intervention over time. Third, we compared test scores within and across groups to examine the effect of the UV intervention on conceptual understanding. Finally, we analyzed data collected from the recall stimulus interview. The interview included questions to unpack overall learning experiences associated with the intervention, such as “Did you feel that the feedback provided was helpful for your learning?”, and “How did you perceive the effect of the writing activity on your learning emotions?”. Interview data from the control group were not analyzed here since the focus of the analysis was on identifying the perceived effect of the UV intervention. Open coding was used to identify common themes that the participants perceived about the positive and negative effects of the UV intervention on regulating their affective states. Results Overall effect on negative emotions Overall, the most frequently occurring emotion was boredom ( M = 14.46, SD = 11.56), followed by frustration ( M = 9.97, SD = 9.35) and confusion ( M = 7.80, SD = 8.11). Table 3 shows AU14 (dimpler) for boredom ( M = 14.90, SD = 11.75) with the highest incidence, whereas AU45 (blink) for boredom ( M = 1.13, SD = 3.93), had the lowest incidence. Regarding the occurrence of negative emotions per group, Table 4 shows that boredom was the highest in the control group ( M = 29.80). In contrast, confusion was the highest in the writing-feedback group ( M = 12.60). The occurrence of frustration was relatively similar between the groups. We conducted MANOVA to investigate whether the occurrences of negative emotions were significantly different across the groups. We chose MANOVA due to the significant correlation found between confusion and frustration ( r = .38, p &lt; .05) and between frustration and boredom ( r = .36, p &lt; .05). There was a significant difference in the frequencies of boredom between the groups. Providing UV feedback and writing activity explained the frequency of boredom by 34% (η2 = 0.34). However, we found no significant difference between the groups for confusion and frustration. For boredom, the post-hoc analysis with the Scheffé test showed that there was a statistically significant difference between the control group and the feedback-only group, and between the control and the writing-feedback group. The feedback-only and writing-feedback groups did not significantly differ in the occurrences of boredom. Patterns of Affective States Changes For visualization, we expressed the learners’ negative emotions in units of one second through color coding. Due to space constraints, we selectively present three sections (beginning, middle, and last segments) to show overall changes. First, the visualization in Fig. 7 shows that boredom frequently occurred from the early stage of learning (up to 5 min), especially in the control group. The occurrence of boredom was relatively lower in the writing-feedback group. From the middle point of learning (about 10−15 min) in Fig. 8 , we noticed more frequent occurrences of confusion in the feedback-only and writing-feedback groups. Toward the end of learning (after 20 min) in Fig. 9 , we found a pattern of frequently prolonged boredom in all three groups. After confirming the overall patterns over time, we moved to analyze how learners’ affective states changed before and after receiving the UV feedback message. The participants received a total of 86 feedback messages. We excluded eight cases where we did not detect a specific change in emotions within three minutes after receiving a feedback message. The existing research suggests that boredom is related to disengagement, while confusion is necessary for learning (Baker et al., 2010 ). Based on this (also see Fig. 1), we categorized the patterns of changes in affective states before and after receiving the UV feedback message into improvement , no change , and worsening . Table 5 demonstrates that the most frequent patterns were no change (48.72%), followed by improvement (35.90%) and worsening (15.38%). Next, we conducted a group comparison to determine whether the pre-writing UV activity affected the change in negative emotions. We tested two experimental groups that received UV feedback messages. As seen in Table 6 , Chi-square test results show no statistically significant difference between the feedback-only and writing-feedback groups, implying no effect of the pre-writing UV activity on the changing patterns in negative emotions. Effects on conceptual understanding We analyzed test scores to investigate the effect of the UV intervention on learners’ conceptual understanding. Table 7 shows that the mean of pre-test scores was lowest in the control group ( M = 1.70, SD = 1.16), and highest in the writing-feedback group ( M = 2.50, SD = 0.85). As the pre-test score may influence conceptual understanding and negative emotions, we conducted ANOVA to examine significant differences in the pre-test scores. As the result indicated no significant difference in the pre-test scores, it was assumed that the three groups did not differ in their prior understanding of the topic, F (2, 28 ) = 1.22, p &gt; .05. The paired samples t-test revealed that all three groups had significant differences between the pre-test and post-test scores: control ( t = -3.31, p &lt; .01), feedback-only ( t = -2.54, p &lt; .05), and writing-feedback ( t = -3.34, p &lt; .01). Next, we conducted ANOVA to investigate the effect of the UV intervention on conceptual understanding across groups. Gains between pre-test and post-test scores were used for the analysis. Table 8 reveals that gains in conceptual understanding did not differ significantly across the three groups. Learner perceptions of the utility value intervention We extracted and categorized themes from the interview data with 20 participants in the two experimental groups who received the UV intervention during online video-based learning. Table 9 shows eight themes about the UV feedback message and five themes about the pre-learning UV writing activity perceived by the participants. Regarding the benefit of the UV feedback message, the most frequently reported theme was improved concentration. The participants responded that they were aware of the useful value of the learning topic through the presented feedback and made efforts to focus on the learning topic. In addition, the pop-up window and pause function accompanying the value feedback also contributed to increasing the learner’s concentration, as seen in the below excerpts: “It was difficult for me to concentrate on learning for a long time. But I was able to concentrate more when I received the feedback message that focusing is beneficial to get value from the lecture. The feedback helped me to concentrate a little longer” (L4, female, 20−24 years old). “It did help me with concentration. The topic is an area I’m not very interested in, so I got easily lost. But when the feedback message popped up, I pressed the OK button and listened again. The feature that the message pops up and then turns off helped me to re-focus on learning” (L1, female, 30−35 years old). In addition, the UV feedback provided encouragement and support to learners in an online video-based learning environment where interaction and communication were somewhat limited. In particular, it relieved the feeling of isolation and provided emotional support. Participants mentioned encouragement as the positive and motivating factor of the UV feedback message: “There is no communication available in an online learning environment. This is a situation where I have to concentrate on learning by myself. But just seeing such a feedback message made me feel like I was receiving some personalized support” (L16, male, 25−29 years old). “I really wanted to learn big data, so I was eager to take the course. However, the content was very difficult to follow, and I kept looking at the time left. Then the feedback message popped up in the middle. At first, I was annoyed by the message, so I turned it off. But from the middle point, I felt like someone was encouraging me to learn. And then, in the second half, I was able to concentrate more on the lecture” (L17, female, 25−29 years old). Some participants responded that while the feedback message did not directly induce improved concentration, it provided an opportunity for re-focusing and a change of mood. In addition, the feedback message effectively drew attention when utility values were related to the participants’ context: “It felt like I was getting support. When the message presented something related to getting a job promotion. I felt that was right! Knowing this can be helpful for my position. I have been working for this company, but I could not understand how to select and analyze data. So, I need to know what this is all about” (L3, female, 30−35 years old). “I think the most appropriate benefit would be a change of mood. It would be boring if the instructor continued to talk. But with the message, I felt like the mode for learning changed ” (L6, male, 25−29 years old). While the participants generally had positive perceptions, some reported feeling more burdened to learn when receiving the UV feedback message. This view was particularly clear for some learners who had high value for learning but felt low control over the learning process. In addition, the participants responded that the feedback message disturbed the flow of their concentration. However, their study habits seem to influence this belief. For example, the feedback presentation was an obstacle to learning when learners prefer to learn in a free environment or to play a video quickly: “ As this is a difficult topic, I was trying to concentrate. But I was annoyed because the message was disturbing” (L18, female, 30−35 years old). “Usually, when listening to online lectures, I tend to stop and take notes at a faster speed. So it was frustrating to listen to it very slowly. The message cut the flow while I was focused” (L2, female, 25−29 years old). Next, the analysis of the interview data from ten participants who performed the UV writing activity revealed that many participants felt that the activity aroused interest before taking the video lecture. The second highest theme was that there was little relationship between the writing activity and the learning topic. The participants perceived that while the topic in the writing activity was general, the learning topic in the lecture was highly specific. Hence, they did not perceive a close connection between the writing activity and the lecture material. The participants also mentioned that the message was helpful to get motivated before learning and to be prepared for cognitive learning, such as grasping key learning concepts and improvement of concentration: “Writing something made me interested in the lecture. If I had just watched the lecture, I would not have been able to understand the context of what it was about. I am now interested in the course Big Data” (L15, male, 25−29 years old). “This (writing activity) motivated me. If there was no such thing at all, I think my concentration would have gone down a bit. . Today, my concentration was not good, but I tried to keep focusing by thinking that it’s important to learn and know how these things are related.” (L17, female, 25−29 years old). “Writing was about a general topic of big data. But the lecture was specific and academic. So I felt the writing activity was not highly related to the lecture” (L11, female, 30–34 years old). Discussion and conclusion Discussion of the Key Findings and Implications Recognizing the need to alleviate learners’ negative emotions in online video-based learning, the main purpose of this study was to examine the effect of the utility value (UV) intervention that was designed to help learners perceive the usefulness between the course topic and their lives. The intervention included two components: pre-learning UV writing activity and UV feedback messages. We investigated the potential impact of the UV intervention on learners’ negative emotions (i.e., boredom, confusion, and frustration) and conceptual understanding through the experiment with 30 Korean adult learners in three groups (control, feedback only, and writing−feedback). In this section, we discuss the main findings according to each research question and draw implications related to the design of UV interventions for asynchronous online video-based learning. The first research question was to examine the effect of the UV intervention on the occurrence of confusion, frustration, and boredom during online video-based learning. Overall, this study found that the UV feedback messages significantly reduced the frequency of boredom while the UV writing activity did not. The frequency of boredom was significantly lower in the two experimental groups that received the UV feedback messages than in the control group. However, the UV intervention, both the UV feedback and UV writing, did not significantly influence the occurrence of confusion and frustration. This finding is rather inconsistent with the previous research that reported the positive effect of affective or affect-aware feedback on reducing the occurrence of confusion and frustration (Rajendran et al., 2019 ). According to D’Mello and Graesser ( 2012 ), confusion occurs when learners experience cognitive disequilibrium. When the confusion state persists, learners experience frustration. We interpret that our UV invention was not effective in assisting the learners to resolve cognitive disequilibrium as indicated through confusion and frustration states. During the interview, participants frequently mentioned that the topic ‘big data analysis’ was highly technical and challenging to learn. It is possible that although learners perceived the usefulness of learning about big data through the feedback message and/or the writing activity, such perceptions did not help them better engage in the learning and resolve cognitive disequilibrium. Concerning the changes in affective states before and affective receiving the UV feedback messages, we found that the participants experienced changes in emotions in 48.72% of the cases. In 37.18% of cases, we found learners’ emotional states enhanced, whereas 14.10% worsened. Unlike empathy mainly studied as affective feedback, UV feedback messages mediate affective states through cognitive changes in values, given the intermate connection between cognition and emotion. This study assumed that affective feedback based on utility values could bring positive effects such as improving concentration and providing relevance for learning. The changes in affective states in this study suggest that this assumption worked for about one-third of the participants who transited to more positive emotions or managed to escape boredom. The lack of personalized adaptation may explain the rather weak effect of the UV feedback messages. In ITS environments, feedback messages are generally adapted to the level of learners’ understanding and/or affective states. For instance, Rajendran et al. ( 2019 ) developed the affective feedback mechanism in the ITS to detect learners’ frustration and adapted motivational feedback messages to address different causes of frustration. While our UV feedback messages were diversified with four types (i.e., utility for daily life, utility for jobs, utility for school, and social utility), the message content was not adapted according to the learner’s states due to technical difficulties. If the UV feedback message is more personalized to learners’ affective states and their learning goals (proximal or distal goals), the UV feedback mechanism can be more effective to help learners perceive the relevance of their learning, thereby more emotionally and behaviorally engaged in the online learning process. This suggestion is aligned with Cabestrero et al. ( 2018 ) that attributed no significant effect of the affective feedback in the ITS to the level of personalization. They suggested that affective texts in the feedback message need to be more specific and personalized to the learner’s context and level of understanding. Regarding the second research question, this study found that the UV intervention did not significantly improve learners’ conceptual understanding. This finding contradicts the results from the previous studies that suggest positive effects of the UV intervention on learner interest and achievement (Harackiewicz et al., 2016 ; Hulleman &amp; Harackiewicz, 2021 ). The positive effect of UV writing has been well-documented in face-to-face classroom situations (Hulleman et al., 2016 ). Our finding suggests that the impact of UV writing may not be easily replicated in online learning situations and need contextual interpretations. We interpret that the UV writing activity in our online learning context was not strong enough in terms of timing and dosage to help students make specific personal connections between the lecture content and their lives. This is consistent with Rosenzweig et al. ( 2019 ), which found no significant effect of UV essay writing in the online learning situation. Considering the nature of online learning, they simplified the UV essay requirement to be shorter. In general, students in face-to-face classroom situations receive UV essay assignments more frequently and are required to write a longer essay. Longer engagement time in learning will help learners develop better conceptual understandings by internalizing and reflecting on key concepts in the video lecture. The effect of the UV feedback message was also insignificant in improving conceptual understanding. Based on the logic of the UV intervention, we assumed that learners who received the UV feedback messages could be better engaged in learning by perceiving more relevance of their learning, therefore affecting their cognitive understanding. We interpret the insignificant effect due to the failure of UV feedback messages to regulate confusion and frustration. As discussed earlier, the UV feedback messages were effective only in the occurrence of boredom. Previous studies have reported that online learners in MOOCs often experience confusion and frustration since they are left to self-regulate their emotions and engagement (Ding &amp; Zhao, 2020 ; Liu et al., 2022 ). Confusion and frustration are indicators that learners experience cognitive disequilibrium (D’Mello &amp; Graesser, 2012 ). As such, we suggest that in asynchronous video-based learning situations that intend to improve cognitive understanding, affective support alone may not be sufficient. Cognitive elements such as hints and in-video quizzes (Kim &amp; So, 2022 ) that directly address issues associated with cognitive difficulties are necessary as an additional intervention strategy. The last research question examined how the participants perceived the effect of the UV intervention on their affective states during online video-based learning. The participants frequently mentioned that the UV feedback messages positively enhanced their concentration and motivation because they reminded them of the usefulness of learning beyond simply providing encouragement or support. They also felt the message was like someone encouraging them to learn. It is also worth noting some negative responses that the UV feedback messages increased cognitive load and the flow of learning was interrupted through pop-up messages. Cabestrero et al. ( 2018 ) also reported a similar finding that interruptions by pop-ups and lack of control were the potential reasons for the insignificant effect of affective feedback. It is possible that some learners perceived the UV feedback message as a distractor rather than an enhancer to increase their engagement and positive emotions. Since almost 50% of participants did not change their affective states after receiving the UV feedback, this may suggest the need for further improving the design and delivery of feedback messages. One possible solution for this issue is to divide the video lecture into multiple sections based on the cognitive flow and to provide feedback messages after each section ends. Unlike our approach to detect and intervene in negative emotions immediately, this is a delayed fixed feedback approach that can be less technically challenging. Another solution is to allow learners to have more control over what and how they want to receive feedback messages. While feedback is necessary to reduce repeated and persistent boredom, in other cases, allowing learners’ control over the provision of feedback may minimize the interruption of feedback in the flow of learners’ cognitive learning (Cabestrero et al., 2018 ). Concerning the pre-learning UV writing activity, the participants perceived that the activity induced interest, motivation, preparation for learning, and improved concentration. However, some participants (22.22%) perceived that the writing activity and the content of the video lecture were not highly related. We speculate that the instructions for the UV writing activity in this study were not specific and personal enough to prompt the learners to make meaningful connections between big data analysis and their lives or goals. Past UV intervention research suggests that high school and university students often experience difficulty to make strong connections in the UV writing activity (Harackiewicz et al., 2016 ; Hulleman et al., 2017 ). Even adult learners like those in this study tend to find it difficult to make meaningful connections between course materials and their lives. This finding suggests that the design of pre-learning UV writing activities needs to help learners make better connections through appropriate scaffolds such as sentence openers, sample quotes, and prompting questions to guide writing processes (Gaspard et al., 2015 ). Beyond simple essay writing, the format of UV writing can be diversified such as wiring a letter to a significant other (e.g., parents, friend), drawing a concept map to explain how knowledge of a certain topic applies to a learner’s life, and evaluating quotations about the usefulness of the course material (Gaspard et al., 2015 ; Hulleman et al., 2017 ; Hulleman &amp; Harackiewicz, 2021 ). Limitations and Future Research directions This section presents some limitations of the present study and suggests areas for future research directions. First, since we conducted the study in a controlled lab setting, it may not reflect the typical situations of online video-based learning, such as taking online lectures at home. The participants might have experienced anxiety or insecurity since they had to perform in an unfamiliar environment. Therefore, researchers should conduct future studies in natural learning environments to increase contextual fidelity. Second, this study did not fully control other variables, which might have influenced the occurrences of negative emotions. Diverse physiological and cognitive factors could affect emotions, including learners’ mood, fatigue, and prior knowledge. While the statistical analysis of pre-test scores did not suggest any significant differences across the groups, we do not rule out the possibility of learners’ pre-knowledge affecting their negative emotions and cognitive understanding (D’Mello &amp; Graesser 2012 ). Third, the experiment did not investigate positive emotions and the long-term effects of the UV intervention. We did not include positive emotions since this study primarily focused on the emotions that need intentional interventions. In future research, researchers can investigate emotions that are generally considered positive such as joy, flow, and curiosity, especially how positive and negative emotions interact or transit during learning processes. Forth, regarding the nature of the experiment, since this research is a one-time implementation using a small sample, it was limited to identifying long-term effects. Given that it requires significant time for learners to internalize the relevance of course materials and to make connections with their lives (Canning et al., 2018 ), future research should consider a longer-term research design with a larger same to examine longitudinal effects such as sustained interest in the course topic. Lastly, some methodological limitations exist to the accuracy of analyzing verbal data and FACS. To judge whether participants were experiencing negative emotions, we analyzed their utterances related to boredom, confusion, and frustration based on their verbalization. Participants might have expressed negative emotions by using words not included in this study. To overcome this limitation, we plan to do a follow-up study with a sophisticated analysis of emotion-related words, such as using machine learning of verbal data to cluster words related to negative emotions. Online video-based learning that utilizes pre-recorded video lectures is expected to continuously expand in various learning contexts even after the pandemic is over. Thus far, emotional regulation in online video-based learning has been primarily left to individual learners since few mechanisms to support learners’ emotions are embedded in the design of online video lectures. This study provides implications concerning how asynchronous online video-based learning can be designed to help learners regulate negative emotions and engaged in the learning process. The central issue in the affective feedback research is “to determine when, how, and where affect-drive feedback is needed” flow (Cabestrero et al., 2018 , p. 1252). As far as we know, this is the first study that included the pre-learning writing and affective feedback messages as the elements of the UV intervention and tested its effect under online learning situations. The contribution is that this study provided empirical evidence of what elements of the UV intervention worked or did not work for learners’ emotional and cognitive engagement in online learning situations. In conclusion, this study suggests that future UV interventions in online learning contexts need to consider personalized adaptations in feedback messages and scaffolding writing processes to prompt students to better create meaningful connections between course materials and their lives. Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Data Availability The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. Declarations Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. References Baker RS D’Mello SK Rodrigo MMT Graesser AC Better to be frustrated than bored: The incidence, persistence, and impact of learners’ cognitive–affective states during interactions with three different computer-based learning environments International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 2010 68 4 223 241 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2009.12.003 Buhr EE Daniels LM Goegan LD Cognitive appraisals mediate relationships between two basic psychological needs and emotions in a massive open online course Computers in Human Behavior 2019 96 85 94 10.1016/j.chb.2019.02.009 Cabestrero R Quirós P Santos OC Salmeron-Majadas S Uria-Rivas R Boticario JG Ferri FJ Some insights into the impact of affective information when delivering feedback to students Behaviour &amp; Information Technology 2018 37 12 1252 1263 10.1080/0144929X.2018.1499803 Canning EA Harackiewicz JM Priniski SJ Hecht CA Tibbetts Y Hyde JS Improving performance and retention in introductory biology with a utility-value intervention Journal of Educational Psychology 2018 110 6 834 10.1037/edu0000244 30294006 PMC6168083 Craig SD D’Mello S Witherspoon A Graesser A Emote aloud during learning with AutoTutor: Applying the Facial Action Coding System to cognitive–affective states during learning Cognition and Emotion 2008 22 5 777 788 10.1080/02699930701516759 Curry KW Spencer D Pesout O Pigford K Utility value interventions in a college biology lab: The impact on motivation Journal of Research in Science Teaching 2020 57 2 232 252 10.1002/tea.21592 Dillon, J., Bosch, N., Chetlur, M., Wanigasekara, N., Ambrose, G. A., Sengupta, B., &amp; D’Mello, S. K. (2016). Student emotion, co-occurrence, and dropout in a MOOC context. Paper presented at the 9th International Conference on Educational Data Mining, EDM 2016 (pp. 353–357). Ding Y Zhao T Emotions, engagement, and self-perceived achievement in a small private online course Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 2020 36 4 449 457 10.1111/jcal.12410 D’Mello SK Craig SD Graesser AC Multimethod assessment of affective experience and expression during deep learning International Journal of Learning Technology 2009 4 3–4 165 187 10.1504/IJLT.2009.028805 D’Mello S Graesser A Dynamics of affective states during complex learning Learning and Instruction 2012 22 2 145 157 10.1016/j.learninstruc.2011.10.001 D’Mello SK A selective meta-analysis on the relative incidence of discrete affective states during learning with technology Journal of Educational Psychology 2013 105 4 1082 1099 10.1037/a0032674 D’Mello SK Craig SD Sullins J Graesser AC Predicting affective states expressed through an emote-aloud procedure from AutoTutor’s mixed-initiative dialogue International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 2006 16 1 3 28 Eccles JS Wigfield A Motivational beliefs, values, and goals Annual Review of Psychology 2002 53 1 109 132 10.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.135153 11752481 Ekman P An argument for basic emotions Cognition &amp; Emotion 1992 6 3–4 169 200 10.1080/02699939208411068 Ekman, P., &amp; Friesen, W. V. (1978). ). Facial action coding system: Investigators’ guide . Consulting Psychologists Press. Feidakis M Caballé S Daradoumis T Jiménez DG Conesa J Providing emotion awareness and affective feedback to virtualised collaborative learning scenarios International Journal of Continuing Engineering Education and Life Long Learning 2014 6 2 141 167 10.1504/IJCEELL.2014.060154 Forgas, J. (2001). The role of affect in social cognition. In J. Forgas (Ed.), Feeling and thinking: The role of affect in social cognition (pp. 1–28). Cambridge University Press. Gaspard H Dicke AL Flunger B Schreier B Häfner I Trautwein U Nagengast B More value through greater differentiation: Gender differences in value beliefs about math Journal of Educational Psychology 2015 107 3 663 677 10.1037/edu0000003 Gaspard H Häfner I Parrisius C Trautwein U Nagengast B Assessing task values in five subjects during secondary school: Measurement structure and mean level differences across grade level, gender, and academic subject Contemporary Educational Psychology 2017 48 1 67 84 10.1016/j.cedpsych.2016.09.003 Gläser-Zikuda M Seel NM Affective and emotional dispositions of/for learning Encyclopedia of the sciences of learning 2012 Boston, MA Springer 165 169 Grawemeyer, B., Holmes, W., Gutiérrez-Santos, S., Hansen, A., Loibl, K., &amp; Mavrikis, M. (2015). Light-bulb moment? Towards adaptive presentation of feedback based on students’ affective state. Proceedings of the 20th international conference on intelligent user interfaces (pp. 400–404). Grawemeyer B Mavrikis M Holmes W Gutiérrez-Santos S Wiedmann M Rummel N Affective learning: Improving engagement and enhancing learning with affect-aware feedback User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 2017 27 1 119 158 10.1007/s11257-017-9188-z Gross JJ Emotion regulation: Current status and future prospects Psychological Inquiry 2015 26 1 1 26 10.1080/1047840X.2014.940781 Harnett PH Reid N Loxton NJ Lee N The relationship between trait mindfulness, personality and psychological distress: A revised reinforcement sensitivity theory perspective Personality and Individual Differences 2016 99 1 100 105 10.1016/j.paid.2016.04.085 Harackiewicz JM Canning EA Tibbetts Y Priniski SJ Hyde JS Closing achievement gaps with a utility-value intervention: Disentangling race and social class Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2016 111 5 745 765 10.1037/pspp0000075 26524001 PMC4853302 Houlden S Veletsianos G A posthumanist critique of flexible online learning and its “anytime anyplace” claims British Journal of Educational Technology 2019 50 3 1005 1018 10.1111/bjet.12779 Hulleman CS Barron KE Kosovich JJ Lazowski RA Student motivation: Current theories, constructs, and interventions within an expectancy-value framework Psychosocial skills and school systems in the 21st century 2016 Cham Springer 241 278 Hulleman, C. S., &amp; Harackiewicz, J. M. (2021). The utilityvalue intervention. In G. M. Walton, &amp; A. J. Crum (Eds.), Handbook of wise interventions: How social psychology can help people change (pp. 100–125). The Guilford Press. Hulleman CS Kosovich JJ Barron KE Daniel DB Making connections: Replicating and extending the utility value intervention in the classroom Journal of Educational Psychology 2017 109 3 387 404 10.1037/edu0000146 Jiménez S Juárez-Ramírez R Castillo VH Licea G Ramírez‐Noriega A Inzunza S A feedback system to provide affective support to students Computer Applications in Engineering Education 2018 26 3 473 483 10.1002/cae.21900 Johnson ML Sinatra GM Use of task-value instructional inductions for facilitating engagement and conceptual change Contemporary Educational Psychology 2013 38 1 51 63 10.1016/j.cedpsych.2012.09.003 Kapoor A Burleson W Picard RW Automatic prediction of frustration International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 2007 65 8 724 736 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2007.02.003 Kim E So HJ Design and examination of the effect of in-video quizzes to regulate negative emotions in video-based learning Korean Journal of Educational Technology 2022 38 1 219 247 10.17232/KSET.38.1.219 Lee J So HJ Ha S Kim E Park K Unpacking academic emotions in asynchronous video-based learning: Focusing on korean learners’ affective experiences The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher 2021 30 3 247 261 10.1007/s40299-021-00565-x Linnenbrink EA Emotion research in education: Theoretical and methodological perspectives on the integration of affect, motivation, and cognition Educational Psychology Review 2006 18 4 307 314 10.1007/s10648-006-9028-x Liu S Liu S Liu Z Peng X Yang Z Automated detection of emotional and cognitive engagement in MOOC discussions to predict learning achievement Computers &amp; Education 2022 181 104461 10.1016/j.compedu.2022.104461 Malekzadeh M Mustafa MB Lahsasna A A review of emotion regulation in intelligent tutoring systems Journal of Educational Technology &amp; Society 2015 18 4 435 445 Moneta GB Kekkonen-Moneta SS Affective learning in online multimedia and lecture versions of an introductory computing course Educational Psychology 2007 27 1 51 74 10.1080/01443410601061413 O’Halloran, K. L. (2011). Multimodal Analysis Video . Multimodal Analysis Company. http://multimodal-analysis.com/index.html Pekrun R The impact of emotions on learning and achievement: Towards a theory of cognitive/motivational mediators Applied Psychology 1992 41 4 359 376 10.1111/j.1464-0597.1992.tb00712.x Pekrun R The control-value theory of achievement emotions: Assumptions, corollaries, and implications for educational research and practice Educational Psychology Review 2006 18 4 315 341 10.1007/s10648-006-9029-9 Pekrun R Goetz T Frenzel AC Barchfeld P Perry RP Measuring emotions in students’ learning and performance: The achievement Emotions Questionnaire (AEQ) Contemporary Educational Psychology 2011 36 1 36 48 10.1016/j.cedpsych.2010.10.002 Rajendran R Iyer S Murthy S Personalized affective feedback to address students’ frustration in ITS IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies 2019 12 1 87 97 10.1109/TLT.2018.2807447 Robison, J., McQuiggan, S., &amp; Lester, J. (2009). Evaluating the consequences of affective feedback in intelligent tutoring systems. In C. Muhl, D. Heylen, &amp; A. Nijholt (Eds.), Proceedings of International Conference on Affective Computing &amp; Intelligent Interaction (pp. 37–42). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press. Rosenberg EL Levels of analysis and the organization of affect Review of General Psychology 1998 2 3 247 270 10.1037/1089-2680.2.3.247 Rosenzweig EQ Hulleman CS Barron KE Kosovich JJ Priniski SJ Wigfield A Promises and pitfalls of adapting utility value interventions for online math courses The Journal of Experimental Education 2019 87 2 332 352 10.1080/00220973.2018.1496059 Stein, N. L., &amp; Levine, L. J. (Eds.). (1990). Making sense out of emotion: The representation and use of goal-structured knowledge . Erlbaum. TechSmith (2012). Morae Recorder (Ver 3.3.0). TechSmith co. https://www.techsmith.com Timothy, J. X. (2018). Intelligent tutor systems addressing student disengagement: Adding formative reappraisal to enhance engagement and learning [Unpublished doctoral dissertation]. Michigan State University. Wigfield A Eccles JS Expectancy-value theory of achievement motivation Contemporary Educational Psychology 2000 25 1 68 81 10.1006/ceps.1999.1015 10620382