pmc Sociol Health Illn Sociol Health Illn 379 blackwellopen SHIL Sociology of Health &amp; Illness 0141-9889 1467-9566 pmc-is-collection-domain yes pmc-collection-title Wiley Open Access Collection PMC12188030 PMC12188030.1 12188030 12188030 40556122 10.1111/1467-9566.70062 SHIL70062 1 Original Article Original Article ‘Medical Fatphobia Is Not Something We Invent’: Weight Stigma in Healthcare Experienced by Women in the Antifatphobia Movement in Brazil and Spain de Moraes Prata Gaspar Maria Clara https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1517-4981 1 ma.prata@gmail.com Verthein Úrsula https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1304-9642 2 de Morais Sato Priscila https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9850-6859 3 1 Department of Nutrition, Food Science and Gastronomy Nutrition and Food Safety Research Institute (INSA) Torribera Food Campus ‐ University of Barcelona (UB) Barcelona Spain 2 Department of Food, Nutrition and Physical Activity Faculty of Health Sciences Universitat Oberta de Catalunya Barcelona Spain 3 Department of Nutrition School of Nutrition Federal University of Bahia Salvador Brazil * Correspondence: Maria Clara de Moraes Prata Gaspar ( ma.prata@gmail.com ) 24 6 2025 7 2025 47 6 491328 10.1111/shil.v47.6 e70062 28 5 2025 21 11 2024 06 6 2025 25 06 2025 26 06 2025 26 06 2025 © 2025 The Author(s). Sociology of Health &amp; Illness published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd on behalf of Foundation for the Sociology of Health &amp; Illness. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. ABSTRACT Fatphobia, defined as the stigma and discrimination against fat individuals, is a pervasive phenomenon in contemporary societies, embedded in various social contexts, including healthcare. This qualitative, cross‐sectional and descriptive study explores the experiences of medical fatphobia among women involved in the antifatphobia movement in Brazil and Spain, drawing on 14 individual semi‐structured interviews. In both countries, biomedical field was identified as a central agent in the construction and perpetuation of fatphobic discourses. Participants described multiple forms of discrimination: structural discrimination at the macrosocial level, rooted in biomedical discourses that pathologise fatness and individual discrimination at the interpersonal level, encountered in healthcare settings where moral judgements shape professional attitudes and practices. This situation positioned the interviewees as inferior subjects, presumed to lack self‐awareness, rationality and self‐control. It perpetuates a form of symbolic violence—justified under the guise of promoting ‘health’—with wide‐ranging consequences. However, involvement in the antifatphobia movement and the development of a political and collective discourse around the body fostered mechanisms of resistance grounded in empowerment. This enabled interviewees to challenge stigma, critically engage with biomedical discourses and practices and cultivate a more nuanced, socially situated understanding of health and the body. anti‐fatphobia movement discrimination fat activism medical fatphobia obesity qualitative methodology stigmatisation weight stigma Food Observatory pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement no pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY-NC-ND source-schema-version-number 2.0 cover-date July 2025 details-of-publishers-convertor Converter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.5.7 mode:remove_FC converted:25.06.2025 Funding: This research was funded by the Food Observatory (University of Barcelona). 1 Introduction Fatphobia, a term used within fat activism, refers to the stigma and discrimination against fat individuals (Piñeyro 2016 ; Masson 2017 ). This phenomenon is pervasive in contemporary industrialised societies and manifests across various social contexts, including healthcare (Brewis et al. 2018 ; SturtzSreetharan et al. 2021 ; Puhl, Lessard, Pearl, et al. 2021 ; Nutter et al. 2024 ). Although fatphobia is not a new issue, it has gained greater visibility over the past 15 years, largely due to activist movements (Piñeyro 2016 ). It has also received increasing academic attention because of its global prevalence and far‐reaching social, economic, psychological and health consequences (Rubino et al. 2020 ). Combating fatphobia is both a matter of social justice and a means of improving public health. Understanding the lived experiences of fat individuals is essential for uncovering the social dynamics behind this stigma and assessing its consequences; the insights obtained can inform effective intervention strategies (Link and Phelan 2001 ). Moreover, research should also broaden its scope beyond Anglo‐Saxon and northern European countries to include more diverse sociocultural perspectives (Ciciurkaite and Perry 2018 ; Gailey and Harjunen 2019 ; Puhl, Lessard, Pearl, et al. 2021 ; Trainer et al. 2021 ). This study aims to explore how fatphobia operates, particularly within healthcare settings, through the perspectives of women engaged in the antifatphobia movement in Brazil and Spain. Without seeking to be exhaustive, we begin by conceptualising stigma and discrimination, drawing primarily on the work of Link and Phelan ( 2001 , 2014 ), and then provide an analysis of fatphobia, with a specific focus on its manifestations in biomedical discourses and healthcare settings. 1.1 Stigma, Discrimination, Symbolic Power and Symbolic Violence Goffman ( 1963 , 3) conceptualised stigma as ‘an attribute that is deeply discrediting,’ one that reduces the stigmatised individual ‘from a whole and usual person to a tainted, discounted one.’ Although Goffman and other scholars—who, inspired by his work, later proposed their own definitions—viewed stigma as a social construct, early conceptualizations largely focus on its interpersonal dimension, overlooking macro‐social and structural aspects (Guise 2024 ). Expanding on these perspectives, Link and Phelan ( 2001 ) propose that stigma arises when several interrelated components converge: the social process of labelling human differences; the association of labelled individuals with undesirable characteristics and negative stereotypes; the categorisation and separation of individuals who are labelled from those who are not; loss of status within the social hierarchy and discrimination enacted within a power dynamic. These components operate together to sustain stigma, leading to devaluation, rejection and social exclusion. According to Link and Phelan ( 2001 , 2014 ), stigma manifests through four interrelated forms of discrimination. Individual discrimination occurs explicitly in interpersonal relationships. Structural discrimination operates systemically at the macro‐social level (e.g., through policies or institutional practices), affecting social status and life opportunities. Interactional discrimination stems from the preconceptions associated with a stigmatised group. It manifests in interpersonal interactions, shaping the behaviours of both stigmatised and nonstigmatised individuals, and creates inequalities that are not always easily identifiable. Lastly, self‐directed discrimination, or internalized stigma, arises when individuals, having been socialized in a particular socio‐cultural context, internalise negative stereotypes and social expectations about their condition. This can lead them to self‐exclude from situations where discrimination might occur and/or adopt behaviours that either reinforce or challenge the prevailing cultural stereotype. According to Link and Phelan ( 2001 ), stigma is dependent on social, economic and political power, with power asymmetries playing a central role in its dynamics. They refer to ‘stigma power,’ a mechanism through which a social group keeps certain individuals ‘ down, in or away ’ (Link and Phelan 2014 ). Their framework draws on Bourdieu's notion of symbolic power, defined as the capacity to impose a legitimised vision of the social world and its divisions without resorting to physical force (Bourdieu 1980 ). Bourdieu argues that cultural distinctions of value serve as instruments of power. Accordingly, Link and Phelan ( 2014 ) argue that stigma can be understood as a form of symbolic power, as it constitutes a judgement about the worth of an individual or group, imposed by those who stigmatise. Moreover, individuals disadvantaged by symbolic power internalise—often unconsciously—the cultural judgements that define their social worth and position (Bourdieu 1980 ). As Link and Phelan ( 2014 ) describe, this process also applies to the internalisation of stigma, whereby individuals assimilate and self‐direct the negative stereotypes associated with their condition (Corrigan et al. 2006 ). Symbolic power, often invisible, is embedded in taken‐for‐granted aspects of culture, contributing to its naturalisation among both the stigmatisers and stigmatised (Bourdieu 1987, cited in Link and Phelan 2014 ). As a result, it exerts symbolic violence, which, while often invisible, is persistent (Araújo et al. 2009 ). According to Bourdieu ( 1980 ), symbolic violence is a form of domination that occurs when individuals internalise norms imposed by symbolic power, manifesting across various spheres of social life. Symbolic violence is therefore a practical effect of stigma, strongly affecting groups that bear external marks deemed illegitimate or condemnable (Araújo et al. 2009 ). Ultimately, it reproduces power mechanisms—such as stigma and discrimination—that influence values, social practices and behaviours, thereby reinforcing social inequalities. Both Link and Phelan's ( 2001 ) conceptualisation of stigma and discrimination, and the theories of symbolic power and violence have been used to examine stigma in health‐related studies (Guise 2024 ). Therefore, this theoretical framework is particularly relevant for understanding fatphobia in the biomedical field. 1.2 Fatphobia and Fat Activism In Western societies, the components of stigma (Link and Phelan 2001 ) converge on the fat body. Fatness is primarily framed as a behavioural issue and attributed to a lack of self‐control and discipline (Saint Pol 2010 ; SturtzSreetharan et al. 2021 ). This idea, deeply embedded in cultural beliefs, reinforces a binary categorisation of bodies and people: although thinness is associated with beauty, health and discipline, fatness is often perceived as morally deviant and fat individuals are labelled as lazy, ugly, unhealthy and lacking willpower (Poulain 2009 ; Lupton 2013 ). Fatphobia operates as a form of symbolic violence (Piñeyro 2016 ). It is structurally reproduced and internalized in various social contexts, including education, family relationships, the workplace and leisure activities (Rudolph et al. 2009 ; Rubino et al. 2020 ). As with other forms of stigma (Link and Phelan 2001 ), fatphobia constrains life opportunities and leads to a range of interrelated outcomes: it adversely affects mental health, disrupts social relationships, impedes professional advancement and exacerbates social inequalities (Poulain 2009 ; Saint Pol 2010 ; Wu and Berry 2018 ; Ciciurkaite and Perry 2018 ). Notably, both fatphobia and its consequences disproportionately, and severely, affect women (Fikkan and Rothblum 2012 ; Sagi‐Dain et al. 2022 ). The biomedical field may be understood not only as a set of scientific practices and techniques but also as a social construct embedded in power relations, cultural values and social norms (Rhodes 1996 ; Lupton 2012 ). Therefore, biomedicine functions as a system that produces and reproduces cultural meanings. Within this framework, it acts as a producer and reproducer of fatphobic discourses (Lupton 2013 ; Ryan et al. 2023 ), where the four mechanisms of discrimination identified by Link and Phelan ( 2001 ) can occur. First, the biomedical conceptualisation of the fat body is a normative process, particularly through the pathologisation of fatness as a disease. ‘Obesity’ should thus be understood not merely as a medical category but as a socially constructed classification with significant social implications (Poulain 2009 ; Lupton 2013 ). This process of pathologisation, associated with the definition of obesity as a ‘global epidemic’ (Murray 2008 ; Dolezal and Spratt 2023 ) and the use of ‘universal’ norms such as the body mass index (BMI) to classify bodies as ‘normal’ or ‘abnormal’ (Saint Pol 2010 ), actively shapes social norms, representations and practices (Lupton 2012 ). It establishes an altered norm, framing fatness not only as a biological deviation but also as a social one, affecting both how society perceives individuals and how those individuals perceive themselves (Poulain 2009 ). Notably, the pathologisation of fatness emerged concurrently with a cultural shift that increasingly valorised thinness (Jutel 2006 ). In this way, biomedical and social norms converge and reinforce one another, legitimising the stigmatisation of fat individuals and providing a foundation for institutional and social discrimination. In healthcare settings, discrimination against fat individuals may also occur through inadequate medical facilities and equipment designed without consideration for fat bodies (Rubino et al. 2020 ; O'Donoghue et al. 2021 ). Additionally, rejection and exclusion can manifest in interpersonal relationships with healthcare professionals (Sagi‐Dain et al. 2022 ; Paim et al. 2024 ), many of whom internalise negative stereotypes. These biases reduce empathy towards fat patients, compromise quality of care and foster unwarranted pessimism about treatment outcomes, ultimately reinforcing the sense of guilt imposed on patients (Huizinga et al. 2009 ; Ryan et al. 2023 ). As a consequence, patients who experience weight stigma often have poorer health outcomes (Gudzune et al. 2014 ). Furthermore, medical fatphobia contributes to diagnostic errors and can exacerbate health conditions when caregivers fixate on weight rather than other relevant health factors (Bombak et al. 2016 ; Obara et al. 2018 ). Finally, this stigmatising environment can deter fat individuals from seeking medical help altogether (lberga et al. 2019 ; O'Donoghue et al. 2021 ; Wetzel and Himmelstein 2023 ). In the past decade, antifatphobia movements—also known as fat activism—have grown significantly (Piñeyro 2016 ). Emerging in the United States in the 1960s (Cooper 2010 ), these movements aimed to expose ‘ the system of oppression instituted by the aesthetic canon and [give] visibility to the diversity of bodies ’ (Salazar 2020 ). To stimulate collective and political debates on fatphobia, they also challenge biomedical practices and the pathologisation of fatness (Piñeyro 2016 ; Jimenez‐Jimenez 2020 ; Paim et al. 2024 ). In Europe and Latin America, fat activist movements have become increasingly organised in recent years (Lupton 2013 ; Piñeyro 2016 ; Casadó‐Marin and Gracia‐Arnaiz 2020 ), with the Latin American activism significantly influencing the fat activism in Spain. Beyond the chronological aspect, critical studies on fatphobia argue that Latin American actions transcend the universalist epistemologies dominant in the hegemonic Global North and instead generate decolonial, strongly engaged and critical political practices that serve as reference points for European activism (Masson 2017 ; Jimenez‐Jimenez 2020 ; Martínez‐Sariego 2022 ). What emerges is an ‘inverted flow’ or the formation of ‘alternative genealogies,’ in which concepts, strategies and actions follow a counter‐hegemonic trajectory (Masson 2017 ). Despite the expansion of antifatphobia movements, few studies have analysed the experiences of those involved in them. Existing research studies have primarily focused on the history of the movement and/or its actions (Casadó‐Marin and Gracia‐Arnaiz 2020 ; Salazar 2020 ; Jimenez‐Jimenez 2020 ). More broadly, studies examining fatphobia from the perspective of those affected—particularly in healthcare contexts—remain scarce (O’Donoghue et al. 2021 ; Paim et al. 2024 ). This research gap is especially pronounced outside English‐speaking countries (Gailey and Harjunen 2019 ; Puhl, Lessard, Pearl, et al. 2021 ; Trainer et al. 2021 ). This study therefore seeks to explore experiences of weight stigma in the biomedical field among women engaged in antifatphobia movements in Brazil and Spain. It addresses two key questions: First, how do these women, based on their lived experiences, perceive the role of biomedicine and healthcare in producing and perpetuating fatphobic discourses? Second, to what extent has fat activism redefined their own perceptions and experiences, and emboldened them to challenge established power relations? 2 Methodology 2.1 Study Design This research falls within the fields of critical weight/fat studies (Lupton 2013 ), and intersects with the anthropology of health (Lupton 2012 ). It critically examines fatphobic discourses as social phenomena (Piñeyro 2016 ) that are produced and perpetuated through biomedical discourses and practices (Lupton 2013 ). The study is qualitative, cross‐sectional and descriptive, and data were collected in 2021 through individual semi‐structured interviews. The study was approved by the Bioethics Committee of the University of Barcelona. All participants were informed of the study's objectives and provided informed consent. Confidentiality and anonymity were maintained at all stages of the research. 2.2 Setting The study was carried out in Brazil and Spain for the following reasons: (a) the scarcity of research on this topic conducted in more than one cultural context (especially outside English‐speaking countries) (Gailey and Harjunen 2019 ; Puhl, Lessard, Pearl, et al. 2021 ; Trainer et al. 2021 ); (b) the interest in analysing antifatphobia activism in both European and Latin American settings; (c) the influence of Latin American fat activism in Spain; and (d) the documented presence of fatphobia in both countries (Obara et al. 2018 ; Gaspar et al. 2022 ). 2.3 Sampling The inclusion criteria were as follows: being an adult woman, involvement in antifatphobia movements and residing in either Brazil or Spain. No restrictions were applied regarding social class, age or nationality. The gender‐specific focus reflects the disproportionate application of body norms to women (Saint Pol 2010 ) and the predominance of women in antifatphobia movements (Lupton 2013 ). Participants were recruited through an active search strategy, which included the identification of artistic, intellectual and scientific outputs, as well as through the websites and social media profiles of activist groups. A ‘snowball’ sampling method was also employed, whereby initial interviewees provided contacts for other potential participants. Contact was made via email or telephone. The final sample consisted of 14 women: 6 interviewed in Brazil and 8 in Spain. Sample size was determined by both the availability of fat activists and the saturation of the collected data, that is, the point at which no new information was gathered (Grady 1998 ). The participants engaged in various forms of activism, including academic research, writing, arts and education. They ranged in age from 21 to 50 and resided in different cities in Brazil and Spain. All interviewees in Brazil were Brazilian, and in Spain, six were Spanish, one was Uruguayan, and one was Mexican. Thirteen of the 14 interviewees held bachelor's degrees. 2.4 Data Production Data were collected through semi‐structured interviews guided by a script developed specifically for this research, in both Portuguese and Spanish. The script consisted of open‐ended questions that explored participant perceptions and experiences related to their bodies throughout their lives, encounters with fatphobia (particularly within healthcare settings), and their trajectories and actions in the antifatphobia movement. Two female researchers fluent in Spanish and Portuguese conducted the interviews, which on average were 90 min long. Although each researcher was responsible for one country, fieldwork was coordinated daily through regular meetings to ensure methodological consistency. Due to COVID‐19 restrictions, all interviews in Brazil were conducted online, whereas in Spain they were conducted either online or in‐person according to participant preference and health authority recommendations. All interviews were audio‐recorded and transcribed verbatim for analysis. 2.5 Data Analysis A thematic analysis of the interviews was conducted by two researchers (Blanchet and Gotman 2005 ). Analytical categories were collaboratively defined to systematise the collected data. These categories were formalised through both inductive and deductive processes, informed by a prior literature review and in‐depth readings of all interview transcripts from both countries. Once the codes were defined, the transcripts were manually coded using grids created in Excel, which facilitated data visualisation and comparison. Coding and analysis were carried out in the original languages of the interviews (Portuguese and Spanish). The main analytical categories were as follows: fatphobia; the antifatphobia movement; epistemologies of the antifatphobia movement and its links with other social movements; the relationship between the antifatphobia movement and the healthcare sector; fatphobia and access to rights; the repercussions of fatphobia; stigma internalisation; perceptions of ‘obesity’; relationships with healthcare professionals and the concept of the body being ‘in transition.’ These categories were further divided into subcategories as needed. The analyses were initially conducted separately for each country, followed by a combined analysis. Given the high degree of similarity between the two countries, the results are presented as a whole—without being broken down by country—to more accurately reflect the observed social reality. 3 Results 3.1 Fatphobia in the Biomedical Field and the Healthcare Professional‐Patient Relationship Interviewees described fatphobia as a pervasive and oppressive experience that affected their lives, taking on new dimensions as their social, emotional and professional circumstances changed. The biomedical field was identified as a key agent in the construction and perpetuation of fatphobic discourses. The discrimination they encountered was both structural—manifested in ‘material’ aspects such as the lack of furniture and equipment adapted for fat bodies—and interpersonal, involving ‘moral and subjective’ elements, including the attitudes of healthcare professionals. These forms of discrimination were experienced as a kind of ‘violence’ and were perceived as indicative of a lack of humanised care: Very violent, basically they make you feel that you're fat because you want to be fat, and that basically you're fat because you're eating donuts all day. (Barbara, Spain) The day I get (sick), I'm going to seek treatment, and on that day, I want a public policy that provides me with a proper blood pressure cuff, one that doesn't hurt. I want a comfortable chair that doesn't subject me to violence. I want medication, a doctor, a humanized doctor, who knows how to respect me, who knows how to treat me. I want a stretcher that fits me, one that won't collapse, one I’m not afraid to sit on because it will hold my weight. I want humanized care that recognises I am a human being, not an animal (…). (Luisa, Brazil) Regarding interpersonal relationships, the interviewees reported being made to feel unwelcome and judged by healthcare professionals who, through their discourses and actions, constantly reproduced social stereotypes of the fat body versus the thin body. Their representations were permeated by dichotomous framing: adequate versus inadequate, correct versus incorrect, healthy versus pathological and beautiful versus ugly: The gynaecologist weighed me, and when she saw my weight, she said, ‘Aren't you thinking about taking some medication? If you like, I can prescribe you an appetite suppressant.’ Then I said, ‘No, I'm fine, I don't have any issues with my weight,’ and she replied, ‘I'm sorry, but any woman in your situation would hate herself.’ That really hurt. Then she took my scans and said, ‘Wow, you're as healthy as a thin person.’ (Marta, Brazil) Most professionals, either directly or indirectly, attributed negative characteristics or ‘inappropriate’ behaviours to the interviewees. In such situations, the interviewees (or during childhood their relatives) felt under interrogation, as if they had to explain, justify, defend, or convince the professionals that their diet was healthy and that they engaged in physical activity: I remember my mother, after many arguments with the paediatrician, saying, ‘There’s nothing more I can do, she doesn’t eat badly. You’re saying she’s overweight and needs to eat better, but I’m telling you her diet is fine.’ (…) In our house, we ate very well, but of course, people didn’t see it that way. (Clara, Spain) Healthcare professionals reduced the complexity of bodily functioning, overlooking the wide range of sociocultural, economic, political and environmental factors that can influence corporeality. They perpetuated a moralising discourse that framed body size as an individual failing, which led to frustration, anxiety and distress, ultimately generating or intensifying guilt: I went to the doctor, to several doctors—it's a bit like going to confession; if you're a Christian and you confess to a priest, it's exactly the same. You leave with this sense of guilt, like you’ve done something wrong, for not having the tools or the clarity to understand that sometimes the way I feed myself is what brings me to this consultation. And suddenly, they hand me a prescription, a diet, that doesn't reflect my reality. (…) Ultimately, it will be my fault for not following this diet. (…) In general, the doctor would scold me for not following the diet, placing all the responsibility on me. (Lucia, Spain) The pervasive fatphobic attitudes negatively affected both the quality of care and duration of medical consultations. Because healthcare professionals already attributed responsibility to the patient—blaming her for irrationality, bad behaviours or lack of willpower—they exhibited less patience, treated and viewed the patient differently, and tended to shorten the professional‐patient interaction: I feel like if I were thin, they wouldn’t treat me the same way. They immediately link everything to my weight, so that’s all they focus on. (…) In the consultation, they want it to be over quickly… (Paz, Spain) Ever since I was a child, I realized that being fat was partly about being different, and not always in a good way. The treatment was different when I went to the doctor. It was crazy, like, ‘Let’s figure out why this child is fat. Let’s do some tests, but wait, what do you mean she doesn’t have any illnesses? How come all the tests are fine?’ (…) I’ve been dealing with this my whole life. (Marta, Brazil) Healthcare professionals also projected their fatphobic attitudes onto diagnoses and treatments. Even when patients sought medical help for issues clearly unrelated to body weight, such as colds or menstrual cramps, practitioners routinely attributed symptoms to weight‐related causes. They would assume conditions such as hypercholesterolaemia without proper testing, and in most cases, recommend weight loss as the primary treatment. They also made misguided diagnoses regarding emotional issues, such as anxiety, depression or low self‐esteem, attributing these conditions to the patient's physicality without recognising them as potential consequences of the lifelong systemic violence these individuals had endured: Gynaecologists are very fat‐phobic. They think that if you have cramps, like I did when I was a teenager, it’s because [you are] fat. I had friends who were thin, and they also had cramps. We realize how fat‐phobic medicine is, how much it harms us, how much it makes us isolate ourselves and stop doing even simple tests, because what’s really making us sick is the way they treat us. (Luisa, Brazil) In many cases, there was no horizontal dialogue between healthcare professionals and patients. The fat individual seeking medical help was often not listened to, and their treatment was shaped by the stereotypes held by the providers. Patient discomfort or complaints were routinely reduced to a single explanation: body weight. As participants described: ‘ All your problems are always because you're fat ’ (Laia, Spain); ‘ As if my body said it all ’ (Maria, Brazil). These attitudes contributed to the invisibility of the person and their subjectivity. Their knowledge, perceptions, and lived experiences were not taken seriously: I get to the clinic, and the epistemological construction of the person who is going to see me, which shapes their conception of health, makes them look at me and think, ‘This person is sick.’ And then I say, ‘I’ve got a pain here,’ and they say, ‘Your illness is fatness.’ But I say no, the pain is right here, and they say, ‘No, you need to lose weight. That pain is because you're fat.’ They begin with that assumption and invalidate the fat person, erasing their subjectivity and their problems. (Patricia, Brazil) A relationship marked by mistrust and moral superiority, based on an imbalance of power, was established between healthcare professionals and patients. Patients were often positioned as lacking self‐awareness, rationality and control. This dynamic was exacerbated by the privileged social backgrounds of many practitioners, which frequently limited their ability to accept ‘difference,’ whether in terms of body size, social class, gender identity, or other factors. In this context, interviewees emphasised the need to improve the training of healthcare professionals to promote a more humanised and critically informed approach to patient care: There’s a saying in Spanish, ‘Experience is the mother of science.’ In this case, it’s not. What matters is science, not experience. I mean, if I’m telling you this is bad for me, that should matter more than what your book says… (…) I think that all healthcare professionals, especially those in nutrition and medicine, believe they’re gods. They treat what they study as if it were dogma. (Laia, Spain) Medicine is extremely fatphobic. Not just fatphobic, it’s racist, it’s homophobic. It’s built by a white elite that has never ridden a public bus, never needed a public hospital, never gone hungry, or had to worry about money. So it’s a violent construct (…) for people who don’t fit into this heteronormative place. Imagine all the bodies that show up and don’t fit into the little box they recognise, the one they see as important, healthy, and ‘cool.’ (Patricia, Brazil) Finding healthcare professionals who do not engage in fatphobic practices was a significant concern for the interviewees. Although their experiences remained predominantly negative, some participants noted a recent tendency towards a more empathetic approach in a minority of professionals. To identify and promote these care providers, interviewees created and shared lists through their networks. However, some pointed out that these professionals typically work outside public health systems, making their services inaccessible to socioeconomically vulnerable individuals. This lack of access risks compounding existing social, economic, emotional and health‐related inequalities. 3.2 ‘It's for Your Own Health’: Depathologizing the Fat Body and Reclaiming the Term ‘Fat’ In biomedical discourses and healthcare, fat people are often reduced to their weight, which is pathologised, treated as a disease and seen as something that must be corrected: Terrifying. The first person who told me I was sick because I was fat was a nutritionist. I was shocked, crying, because I couldn’t believe I was sick. She told me, ‘Ester, you are sick, and you have to accept your illness. We are going to treat you here.’ She was the first person who ever called me obese. (Ester, Spain) Drawing on their lived experience and knowledge, particularly since the rise of antifatphobia activism, the interviewees challenged this medical pathologisation of the fat body. They observed that the ‘pursuit of health’ and the drive to lose weight at any cost often serves to justify, authorise and legitimise various forms of discrimination and harmful practices, including restrictive diets, inappropriate use of medication and even uncritical recommendation of bariatric surgery. In some cases, the medical ‘obsession’ with weight leads professionals to overlook some risky behaviours, such as smoking. According to the interviewees, most healthcare providers are less concerned with promoting health than with enforcing weight loss: The problem I’ve always had with dietitians is that they have this idea that thinner is always better. So, health is about being thin or not… (…) In the end, the nutritional changes aren’t aimed at helping you feel better—they’re just aimed at making you lose weight. (Laia, Spain) The first time they showed concern about my weight, they took me to the doctor, and the doctor tore me down in the consultation room. He said, ‘You’ll never find a boyfriend.’ (…) The guy was saying absurd things like, ‘What a horrible thing, how sloppy…’ It always comes with this ‘concern for health.’ I went on the doctor’s diet… I lost 30kg in 3 months, and people said to me, ‘Wow, that’s good, right? Health first.’ But I wasn’t healthy at all, either physically or psychologically. It was always clear to me that this preoccupation with health wasn’t genuine. (Lara, Brazil) All the interviewees rejected the idea that a fat person should be classified as ‘sick’ and emphasised that such labelling contributes to further discrimination and social exclusion while reinforcing negative moral judgements about fat people. In their view, biomedical discourses on obesity, as well as normative parameters, such as the BMI, have contributed to the homogenisation of fat individuals, and perpetuated hegemonic social stereotypes about the fat body. In this context, they problematised the construction of biomedical norms, questioned ‘alarmist’ rhetoric (such as the notion of an ‘obesity epidemic’), and highlighted contradictions within biomedical discourses, which are often presented dogmatically: The BMI makes no sense. These kinds of medical tools are created to generate pathologies and pigeonhole certain bodies into these labels. I don’t agree with the origin of this logic, nor with its absurdity, nor with the use of the term. Besides, the word ‘fat’ works perfectly fine for me. (Lucia, Spain) At the same time, according to the informants, this dominant view also individualises issues such as body weight, which are essentially collective, thereby obscuring and oversimplifying structural factors and ignoring deeper dimensions such as social inequalities in healthcare and access to medical treatment: Many factors influence whether your body is fat or thin. Another thing that’s often forgotten is: what opportunities do we have to take care of our bodies? What political, social, economic, and cultural contexts either support or hinder people in taking care of themselves? Because no one wants to talk about that. Instead, it's: fat? Go on a diet. But what resources have I got? (…). (Ester, Spain) The interviewees considered themselves to be ‘healthy’ and emphasised that health should be understood in a more complex, multifactorial way. In their experience, the apparent concern for health within a fatphobic medical system only generates and amplifies negative consequences, as they have witnessed in their own lives: It’s sad. (…) The fat body continues to be fought against. In the biomedical field, the dominant thinking is that the fat body needs to be slimmed down in order to increase its chances of survival. The idea that the only body with the potential to live is the slim body, and that the fat body is destined for a sedentary, unhealthy life and an early death, still prevails. (Suzana, Brazil) For them, the relentless push by health professionals to slim down fat bodies and the so‐called ‘fight against obesity’ ultimately serves to punish fat people, annihilating their subjectivity and ultimately challenging their right to exist: The construction of a disease called obesity, where every fat body is a sick body, regardless of whether their [medical] tests are normal, amounts to exterminating these people. When they say they’re fighting obesity, that's exactly what they mean: ‘We’re going to kill you all.’ (Patricia, Brazil) I don't like the word ‘obesity’ at all. It pathologizes fatness… It's also a very alarmist word, part of a very alarmist discourse about the so‐called ‘obesity epidemic.’ In the end, when we talk about ‘ending obesity,’ we’re really talking about eliminating specific people. I find this very problematic. I prefer the term ‘fat’… What worries me is how this concept supports another type of discourse that justifies discriminatory and oppressive attitudes towards fat bodies (Claudia, Spain) For these reasons, the interviewees rejected the term ‘obese,’ choosing instead to identify as ‘fat.’ They viewed ‘obesity’ as a biomedical construct with a moral charge, one rooted in power and used to socially classify, exclude and oppress individuals. The term, they argued, reduces their identity to mere weight or ‘pathology.’ In this sense, adopting the term ‘fat’ becomes a political act—a way of reclaiming their bodies, ‘hijacked’ by biomedical discourse, and a form of empowerment: It makes me nervous when people use the term ‘obesity.’ I think it’s part of a biomedical discourse… Obesity has already been used to categorise so many things. It's seen as a disease—something wrong that needs to change. It generates discomfort. On the other hand, the term ‘fat’ is just an adjective, a way of being, a body—a way of living… or, at most, a physical characteristic. (Clara, Spain) It's funny because ‘obesity’ is pathological and ‘fat’ is pejorative, right? So, what do we call ourselves? We use the word ‘fat’ to give it a new meaning, just like [what happened with] the word ‘faggot.’ Some fat people say that calling themselves obese sounds nicer, but I don’t agree with that idea, because you can’t separate that word from everything it carries. I don’t think it’s the same process as re‐signifying the word ‘fat.’ The word ‘obese’ comes from a place of scientific authority, just like the term ‘homosexuality’ or ‘scientific racism’—it’s about pathologising our bodies because they are different. Obesity comes from a scientific place of dominance. (Maria, Brazil) 3.3 Medical Fatphobia Impacts Diagnoses and treatments, the questioning of lifestyles, and fatphobic practices originating from positions of authority all contributed to the internalisation of weight stigma. This led interviewees to perceive themselves as ‘different,’ ‘inadequate,’ or ‘deviant,’ existing outside both medical and social norms. Such internalisation brought a set of consequences that, to varying degrees, shaped their life opportunities. Some participants came to ‘justify’ or ‘accept’ discrimination, viewing themselves as deviants who needed to change. Additionally, many of the women withdrew from activities such as exercising or attending job interviews, not because of their weight itself, but due to the stigma they had internalized. This self‐exclusion, referred to as ‘self‐sabotage’ by Barbara (Spain), profoundly affected their mental, physical, social and economic well‐being: I don’t know when my tortuous relationship with my body began, but I do remember that when I was about seven years old, my mother took me to the doctor, who told me I was outside the BMI percentiles… That’s when an authority figure, a doctor, told me, ‘You’re officially fat. You have a problem. Your body is not valid.’ (…) That’s when I started learning that my body wasn’t valid… It’s true that there was always some resistance in me, I didn’t fully believe it… Until adolescence came, and I gave up. I started to believe it. I assumed I was wrong, that my body was in transition, that I had to change. I thought that at some point I would change and everything would be marvellous. (…) during those years, imagine all the self‐esteem I lost, all the beliefs like, ‘if you don’t have a certain body, you can’t get a certain job, you can’t study certain things’… I always wanted to be a dancer. I did become a dance teacher eventually, but only after overcoming those beliefs. Even as an economist, [I thought] it would probably be very hard for me to find a job, and of course, I didn’t even think about having a boyfriend (…) (Laia, Spain) They also began to perceive their bodies as inherently wrong—abnormal, ugly, sick and morally flawed. Every woman interviewed described a long history of dieting and other weight‐loss interventions (e.g., medications), often beginning in childhood. This journey, typically initiated by a first diagnosis of ‘obesity,’ is portrayed as a series of extremely negative experiences—ruptures in their life trajectories—that not only failed to achieve the intended goal of weight loss but also caused significant harm. The consequences were multidimensional, impacting physical health and emotional and social well‐being: yoyo dieting, weight gain, emotional struggles, such as anxiety and low self‐esteem, social and family conflicts and a fraught relationship with food, including eating disorders. These experiences fostered rejection and even hatred of their own bodies, resulting in bodily disconnection, and a diminished sense of vitality and potential. Consequently, their relationship with their bodies became conflict‐ridden—a continuous struggle to punish, chastise and forcibly reshape themselves. They were never able to accept the bodies they had; instead, they fixated on an idealised, imaginary body they hoped to achieve someday. This ‘struggle’ was not only against their physical selves but also against their own subjectivities. Many described pushing their bodies to the limit, often with medical assistance. In the process, they distanced themselves from a relationship of care, pleasure and harmony with their bodies: Medical fatphobia creates a disconnection from the body… To make a good decision about our body, our diet, about taking care of ourselves, we must do it from a place of love, from a connection with that body—understanding its needs, the energy it requires, and how we want to care for it. To care is to love. In other words, you can’t care without affection. All the medical violence made this impossible for me—because of all the bullying, all the pointing fingers, trying to force me into restrictive diets, all the anxiety it caused me. It was terrible for my health. It also created more anxiety… it was violent towards me and completely useless. (Ester, Spain) My life has always revolved around becoming thin. I’ve been fat since childhood, so I’ve always had to fight against it. (…) I’ve done a lot of things that have hurt my body, I’ve made myself ill. I’ve even done crazy things to fit into this world where only thin bodies are socially accepted. (Patricia, Brazil) Finally, medical fatphobia restricted their access to healthcare, depriving them of a basic right, due to both a lack of resources and their own ‘refusal’ to seek medical help. Most interviewees expressed a deep distrust of healthcare professionals and believed that seeking medical care—even just routine check‐ups—would inevitably expose them to uncomfortable and distressing situations where they would be judged solely based on their weight. They described feelings of aversion, dread, fear, suffocation, frustration and guilt: My relationship with healthcare is very complicated, and I can see that my reluctance to seek medical help started because, as a child and teenager, I only went to doctors to lose weight. That was always the goal: lose weight or see if I’m dying. Since I was a child, I [have] felt scared—I remember not wanting to do tests. And the way these professionals treated me—they constantly blamed me for being the way I was, which for them was a terrible problem. As an adult, I often put off appointments because of this fear, because I haven’t found any professionals I trust—ones who will accept my body as it is. (Maria, Brazil) Although their fear of seeking medical help persisted, the interviewees revealed that involvement in the antifatphobia movement—and, in parallel, the politicisation and construction of a collective discourse around the body and fatphobia—enabled them to question dominant narratives and adopt new positions towards healthcare. Going to consultations, occupying clinical spaces and questioning diagnoses and treatments became political acts aimed at challenging power dynamics and transforming the fatphobic practices structurally embedded in both society and biomedicine: Now, I make myself go to the doctor as a political act. It doesn’t seem fair that we’re denied this right, so I go, sometimes even bringing friends. But I tell myself, ‘I have to go.’ (Claudia, Spain) A big part of our fight to depathologize the fat body is about understanding that whether obesity is classified as a disease or not, it doesn’t take away my right to live freely. (Marta, Brazil) 4 Discussion This study investigates how women involved in antifatphobia movements in Brazil and Spain perceive the role of healthcare in producing and perpetuating fatphobic discourses, drawing on their lived experiences. A key finding is the similarity between the two countries in perceptions of medical fatphobia and its association with both physical and symbolic violence (Bourdieu 1980 ). International comparative studies have highlighted the global nature of fatphobia, which is present in societies that differ socially, culturally, economically and politically (Gailey and Harjunen 2019 ; Puhl, Lessard, Himmelstein, et al. 2021 ; Trainer et al. 2021 ). Norms that prioritise thinness and reject fatness have been spreading in both the Global North and South (Brewis et al. 2018 ). However, weight stigma is a social construct (SturtzSreetharan et al. 2021 ), and societies vary in how they define the ideal body and the fat body (Saint Pol 2010 ), as well as in their perceptions of fatness and the intensity of fatphobia (Trainer et al. 2021 ), including among healthcare professionals (Gaspar et al. 2022 ). The similarities between Brazil and Spain identified in the present study may be related to the characteristics of the participants. As the findings suggest, involvement in the antifatphobia movement fosters a critical attitude towards biomedical discourses and practices (Piñeyro 2016 ; Jimenez‐Jimenez 2020 ), which could potentially lead to a more uniform position on this issue. According to the interviewees, fatphobia is deeply embedded in the biomedical system. They identified intersecting forms of discrimination, conceptualised by Link and Phelan ( 2001 , 2014 ), which are mutually reinforcing and therefore difficult to analyse separately. Structural discrimination, operating at macrosocial and institutional levels, was associated with biomedical discourses pathologising fatness and the inadequacy of medical infrastructure and equipment for fat bodies. At the interpersonal level, discrimination emerged in the moralising attitudes and diagnostic practices of healthcare professionals during clinical interactions. These discriminatory practices are rooted in power dynamics that uphold the presumed moral and intellectual superiority of biomedical knowledge and practitioners in contemporary society (Murray 2008 ; Foucault 2010 ; Lupton 2012 ). As a result, biomedical discourses and healthcare contribute to the marginalisation of fat individuals, effectively keeping them ‘down, in, or away’ (Link and Phelan 2014 ). It thus perpetuates an insidious form of symbolic violence (Bourdieu 1980 ), operating invisibly under the guise of promoting ‘health’ while generating multiple self‐reinforcing negative consequences. According to the interviewees, both healthcare professionals (at the individual level) and the biomedical system as a whole (at the macrosocial level) often imposed a rigid classification of their bodies, health, practices and identities based primarily on weight‐related stereotypes. This resulted in a fixed reductive perception that reduced them to mere ‘cases,’ a ‘weight’ or a biomedical category (obesity), leaving little room for their actual complaints, motivations, personal experiences, or subjectivities. Therefore, while their bodies became hypervisible, constantly labelled, scrutinised and subjected to derogatory judgements, they simultaneously experienced hyperinvisibility, as their personal needs and stories were ignored or erased (Gailey and Harjunen 2019 ), leading to dehumanising forms of care (Bombak et al. 2016 ; Paim et al. 2024 ). As the interviewees observed, this situation both reflects and reinforces broader social hierarchies that position fat individuals as inferior subjects presumed to lack self‐awareness, rationality and self‐control. Biomedical discourses surrounding obesity often place the burden of responsibility on the individual, overlooking sociocultural, economic, political and environmental determinants (Poulain 2009 ; Dolezal and Spratt 2023 ; Nutter et al. 2024 ), as well as intersectional dimensions such as gender, social class, ethnicity and age (Ciciurkaite and Perry 2018 ). Central to these discourses is the assumption that individuals can make rational choices about their health and that excess weight is easily controlled through self‐discipline. This belief is a key driver of weight stigma and assigning individual blame (Brewis et al. 2018 ; Trainer et al. 2021 ). Such narratives not only reinforce stigmatising attitudes but also underpin a broader moral discourse that pathologizes fatness (Murray 2008 ). In neoliberal societies, where health is framed primarily as a personal responsibility and disciplinary medicine merges with notions of self‐monitoring and self‐transformation, individuals are expected to act as ‘good,’ self‐controlled citizens, who embody productivity and efficiency, values central to the capitalist system (Foucault 2010 ). Within this logic, fat people are labelled as undisciplined, socially irresponsible and morally suspect (Murray 2008 ; Dolezal and Spratt 2023 ). In this sense, Jimenez‐Jimenez ( 2020 ) argues that the views of healthcare professionals about fatness—defined by biomedicine as a pathology (obesity)—create a clinical scenario of neglect disguised as care. The author suggests that the interactions between practitioners and fat patients carry fascist undertones, in that harmful practices are normalised and misrecognised in healthcare settings. In this way, the biomedical system enacts symbolic violence upon women (Bourdieu 1980 ), subjecting them to repeated humiliation when they seek ‘health,’ and effectively annihilating their subjectivities and personal narratives (Jimenez‐Jimenez 2020 ). Our findings also reflect how biomedicine and the practices of healthcare professionals mirror prevailing cultural norms and stereotypes about the fat body (Paim et al. 2024 ), highlighting the symbiotic connection between biomedicine—often perceived as objective—and hegemonic social and moral values (Murray 2008 ). Medical fatphobia was also perpetuated through the internalisation of weight stigma by the women themselves. The interviewees emphasised the central role of the biomedical field in this process. They reflected on the negative effect of internalisation on both their life opportunities and their engagement with the healthcare system. As shown by previous studies, internalized stigma often discourages fat individuals from seeking medical care (Pearl and Puhl 2018 ; Puhl, Lessard, Himmelstein, et al. 2021 ; Wetzel and Himmelstein 2023 ). Furthermore, the interviewees discussed how stigma influenced the construction of their subjectivity and their relationship with their bodies. They reported viewing their bodies as inherently ‘wrong’ and in need of change—a ‘body in transition’ (Piñeyro 2019 ), or in a ‘liminal state’ (Gailey and Harjunen 2019 ). Drawing on Turner's ( 1974 ) concept of liminality, this state represents a transitory and uncertain phase in which individuals are deprived of their social roles (Gailey and Harjunen 2019 ). According to the interviewees, their fat bodies, and even their lives, were perceived as temporary, awaiting transformation. This liminal positioning often fostered self‐hatred, body alienation, and a constant pursuit of weight loss. It eroded their sense of agency, autonomy and empowerment, leading them to postpone life milestones until they could achieve a thinner body (Gailey and Harjunen 2019 ). In this view, the fat body becomes a mask concealing the ‘true self,’ which is only revealed through weight loss (Lupton 2013 ). This situation ultimately placed them in a place of nonexistence, shaping how they perceived themselves. As a result, living in such a state led to a precarious subjectivity, as the fat body was denied legitimacy as a foundation for identity (Gailey and Harjunen 2019 ). Finally, far from adopting a passive role, the interviewees actively challenged stigma and the power relations that sustain it. As Link and Phelan ( 2001 ) suggest, although power imbalances are difficult to modify, stigmatised groups can mobilise available resources to resist stigmatisation. For these women, joining antifatphobia movements and developing political and collective discourses around the body has allowed them to question dominant biomedical discourses, the pathologisation of fatness, the emphasis on individual responsibility and discriminatory practices of healthcare professionals. This framework facilitates a more nuanced and socially situated understanding of the body and health. Their resistance is expressed through concrete practices such as asserting their right to occupy healthcare spaces or reclaiming the term ‘fat’ as an act of empowerment (Martínez‐Sariego 2022 ). They seek to expose and confront various forms of discrimination that are often unrecognised, normalised and rendered invisible. Their aim is to deconstruct symbolic violence and to redefine their place in both society and biomedicine. 5 Conclusions For the women involved in antifatphobia movements in Brazil and Spain, the biomedical field is perceived as a key agent in the production and perpetuation of fatphobic discourses and practices, exerting symbolic violence. The interviewees identified multiple forms of discrimination—structural, individual, interactional and self‐directed—that have affected them throughout their lives, shaping their health, life opportunities, subjectivities and social position. Participation in antifatphobia activism and the development of a critical, political and collective discourse on fatphobia—particularly medical fatphobia—enabled a re‐signification of their bodies and lives. This process fostered new ways of resistance from a position of empowerment. Although not erasing past suffering, such repositioning offers a framework that situates their bodies and subjectivities in a context of care and understanding. These findings highlight the need for collective spaces that facilitate critical debate on fatphobia, not only among those who experience it, but also among healthcare professionals and society at large. Such forums should challenge dominant hegemonic discourses and help redefine how fatphobia is understood and confronted. Crucially, the fundamental right to nondiscriminatory healthcare must be guaranteed to everyone, regardless of body size. To conclude, some limitations of the study should be noted. Although the sample size was designed based on the data saturation model and the availability of fat activists, it may be useful to expand the sample to include, in future studies, male participants and women who are not involved in the movement. This would shed light on how activism shapes perceptions of medical fatphobia and allow for an examination of gendered dimensions. Finally, complementing qualitative research with a quantitative approach would help generalise the findings. Author Contributions Maria Clara de Moraes Prata Gaspar: conceptualization (equal), data curation (equal), formal analysis (equal), funding acquisition (equal), investigation (equal), methodology (equal), writing – original draft (equal), writing – review and editing (equal). Úrsula Verthein: conceptualization (equal), data curation (equal), formal analysis (equal), funding acquisition (equal), investigation (equal), methodology (equal), writing – original draft (equal), writing – review and editing (equal). Priscila de Morais Sato: data curation (equal), formal analysis (equal), methodology (equal), writing – original draft (equal), writing – review and editing (equal). Ethics Statement The study was approved by the Bioethics Committee of the Universitat de Barcelona. Participants were informed of the study's objectives, and informed consent was requested. Confidentiality and anonymity were ensured throughout all stages of the research. Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Permission to Reproduce Material From Other Sources The authors have nothing to report. Data Availability Statement The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. References Araújo , M. A. L. , M. A. Montagner , R. M. Silva , F. L. Lopes , and M. M. Freitas . 2009 . “ Symbolic Violence Experienced by Men Who Have Sex With Men in the Primary Health Service in Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil: Negotiating Identity Under Stigma .” AIDS Patient Care and STDs 23 : 663 – 668 . 10.1089/apc.2008.0123 . 19630518 Blanchet , A. , and A. Gotman . 2005 . L’entretien . Armand Colin . Bombak , A. E. , D. McPhail , and P. Ward . 2016 . “ Reproducing Stigma: Interpreting ‘Overweight’ and ‘Obese’ Women’s Experiences of Weight‐Based Discrimination in Reproductive Healthcare .” Social Science and Medicine 166 : 94 – 101 . 10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.08.015 . 27544463 Bourdieu , P. 1980 . Le Sens Pratique . Les Éditions de Minuit . Brewis , A. , C. SturtzSreetharan , and A. Wutich . 2018 . “ Obesity Stigma as a Globalizing Health Challenge .” Globalization and Health 14 , no. 1 : 20 . 10.1186/s12992-018-0337-x . 29439728 PMC5811962 Casadó‐Marin , L. , and M. Gracia‐Arnaiz . 2020 . “ ‘I’m Fat and Proud of It’: Body Size Diversity and Fat Acceptance Activism in Spain .” Fat Studies: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Body Weight and Society 9 , no. 1 : 51 – 70 . 10.1080/21604851.2019.1648994 . Ciciurkaite , G. , and B. L. Perry . 2018 . “ Body Weight, Perceived Weight Stigma and Mental Health Among Women at the Intersection of Race/Ethnicity and Socioeconomic Status: Insights From Themodified Labelling Approach .” Sociology of Health &amp; Illness 40 , no. 1 : 18 – 37 . 10.1111/1467-9566.12619 . 28980335 Cooper , C . 2010 . “ Fat Studies. Mapping the Field .” Sociology Compass 4 , no. 12 : 1020 – 1034 . 10.1111/j.1751-9020.2010.00336.x . Corrigan , P. W. , A. C. Watson , and L. Barr . 2006 . “ The Self‐Stigma of Mental Illness: Implications for Self‐Esteem and Self‐Efficacy .” Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 25 , no. 8 : 875 – 884 . 10.1521/jscp.2006.25.8.875 . Dolezal , L. , and T. Spratt . 2023 . “ Fat Shaming Under Neoliberalism and COVID‐19: Examining the UK’s Tackling Obesity Campaign .” Sociology of Health &amp; Illness 45 , no. 1 : 3 – 18 . 10.1111/1467-9566.13555 . 36178389 PMC7614026 Fikkan , J. L. R. E. , and E. D. Rothblum . 2012 . “ Is Fat a Feminist Issue? Exploring the Gendered Nature of Weight Bias .” Sex Roles 66 , no. 9–10 : 575 – 592 . 10.1007/s11199-011-0022-5 . Foucault , M. 2010 . Naissance de la clinique . PUF . Gailey , J. A. , and H. Harjunen . 2019 . “ A Cross‐Cultural Examination of Fat Women’s Experiences: Stigma and Gender in North American and Finnish Culture .” Feminism &amp; Psychology 29 , no. 3 : 374 – 390 . 10.1177/0959353518819582 . Gaspar , M. C. M. P. , P. M. Sato , and F. B. Scagliusi . 2022 . “ Under the ‘Weight’ of Norms: Social Representations of Overweight and Obesity Among Brazilian, French and Spanish Dietitians and Laywomen .” Social Science &amp; Medicine 298 : 114861 . 10.1016/j.socscimed.2022.114861 . 35228094 Goffman , E. 1963 . Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity . Englewood Cliffs . Grady , M. P. 1998 . Qualitative and Action Research: A Practitioner Handbook . Phi Delta Kappa Educational Foundation . Gudzune , K. A. , W. L. Bennett , L. A. Cooper , and S. N. Bleich . 2014 . “ Patients Who Feel Judged About Their Weight Have Lower Trust in Their Primary Care Providers .” Patient Education and Counseling 97 , no. 1 : 128 – 131 . 10.1016/j.pec.2014.06.019 . 25049164 PMC4162829 Guise , A . 2024 . “ Stigma Power in Practice: Exploring the Contribution of Bourdieu’s Theory to Stigma, Discrimination and Health Research .” Social Science &amp; Medicine 347 : 116774 . 10.1016/j.socscimed.2024.116774 . 38537331 Huizinga , M. M. , L. A. Cooper , S. N. Bleich , J. M. Clark , and M. C. Beach . 2009 . “ Physician Respect for Patients With Obesity .” Journal of General Internal Medicine 24 , no. 11 : 1236 – 1239 . 10.1007/s11606-009-1104-8 . 19763700 PMC2771236 Jimenez‐Jimenez , M. L. 2020 . Lute como uma gorda: gordofobia, resistências e ativismos. PhD thesis in Estudos de Cultura Contemporânea . Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso . Jutel , A . 2006 . “ The Emergence of Overweight as a Disease Entity: Measuring up Normality .” Social Science and Medicine 63 , no. 9 : 2268 – 2276 . 10.1016/j.socscimed.2006.05.028 . 16846671 lberga , A. , I. Edache , M. Forhan , and S. Russell‐Mayhew . 2019 . “ Weight Bias and Health Care Utilization: A Scoping Review .” Primary Health Care Research &amp; Development 20 : E116 . 10.1017/S1463423619000227 . 32800008 PMC6650789 Link , B. G. , and J. Phelan . 2001 . “ Conceptualising Stigma .” Annual Review of Sociology 27 , no. 1 : 363 – 385 . 10.1146/annurev.soc.27.1.363 . Link , B. G. , and J. Phelan . 2014 . “ Stigma Power .” Social Science and Medicine 103 : 24 – 32 . 10.1016/j.socscimed.2013.07.035 . 24507908 PMC4451051 Lupton , D. 2012 . Medicine as Culture: Illness, Disease and the Body . Sage Publications . Lupton , D. 2013 . Fat . Routledge . Martínez‐Sariego , M. M. 2022 . “ No soy musa, soy artista, y de las gordas’: Activismo gordo hispánico en Instagram .” Lectora: Revista de Dones i Textualitat 28 : 327 – 346 . 10.1344/Lectora2022.28.18 . Masson , L. 2017 . “ Gordofobia .” In Barbarismos Queer Y Otras Esdrújulas , edited by R. L. Platero , M. Rosón , and E. Ortega , 210 – 216 . Murray , S . 2008 . “ Pathologizing ‘Fatness’: Medical Authority and Popular Culture .” Sociology of Sport Journal 25 , no. 1 : 7 – 21 . 10.1123/ssj.25.1.7 . Nutter , S. , L. A. Eggerichs , T. S. Nagpal , et al. 2024 . “ Changing the Global Obesity Narrative to Recognize and Reduce Weight Stigma: A Position Statement From the World Obesity Federation .” Obesity Reviews 25 , no. 1 : e13642 . 10.1111/obr.13642 . 37846179 PMC13019846 Obara , A. A. , S. R. G. F. Vivolo , and M. S. Alvarenga . 2018 . “ Weight Bias in Nutritional Practice: A Study With Nutrition Students .” Cadernos de Saúde Pública 34 , no. 8 : e00088017 . 10.1590/0102-311x00088017 . 30133656 O’Donoghue , G. , C. Cunningham , M. King , C. O’Keefe , A. Rofaeil , and S. McMahon . 2021 . “ A Qualitative Exploration of Obesity Bias and Stigma in Irish Healthcare; the Patients’ Voice .” PLoS One 16 , no. 11 : e0260075 . 10.1371/journal.Pone.0260075 . 34843517 PMC8629268 Paim , M. B. , D. F. Kovaleskia , and B. F. Selau . 2024 . “ Understanding the Term Medical Fatphobia From the Perspective of Fat People .” Saúde e Sociedade 33 , no. 1 : e220842pt . 10.1590/S0104-12902024220842pt . Pearl , R. L. , and R. M. Puhl . 2018 . “ Weight Bias Internalization and Health: A Systematic Review .” Obesity Reviews 19 , no. 8 : 1141 – 1163 . 10.1111/obr.12701 . 29788533 PMC6103811 Piñeyro , M. 2016 . Stop Gordofobia Y Las Panzas Subversas . Zambra/Baladre . Piñeyro , M. 2019 . 10 gritos contra la gordofobia . Vergara . Poulain , J.‐P. 2009 . Sociologie de l’obésité . PUF . Puhl , R. M. , L. M. Lessard , M. S. Himmelstein , and G. D. Foster . 2021 . “ The Roles of Experienced and Internalized Weight Stigma in Healthcare Experiences: Perspectives of Adults Engaged in Weight Management Across Six Countries .” PLoS One 16 , no. 6 : e0251566 . 10.1371/journal.pone.0251566 . 34061867 PMC8168902 Puhl , R. M. , L. M. Lessard , L. M. Pearl , M. S. Himmelstein , and G. D. Foster . 2021 . “ International Comparisons of Weight Stigma: Addressing a Void in the Field .” International Journal of Obesity 45 , no. 9 : 1976 – 1985 . 10.1038/s41366-021-00860-z . 34059785 Rhodes , L. A. 1996 . “ Studying Biomedicine as a Cultural System .” In Medical Anthropology: Contemporary Theory and Method Revised Edition , edited by C. F. Sargent and T. M. Johnson , 165 – 180 . Praeger . Rubino , F. , R. Puhl , D. Cummings , et al. 2020 . “ Joint International Consensus Statement for Ending Stigma of Obesity .” Nature Medicine 26 , no. 4 : 485 – 497 . 10.1038/s41591-020-0803-x . PMC7154011 32127716 Rudolph , C. W. , C. L. Wells , M. D. Weller , and B. B. Baltes . 2009 . “ A Meta‐Analysis of Empirical Studies of Weight‐Based Bias in the Workplace .” Journal of Vocational Behavior 74 , no. 1 : 1 – 10 . 10.1016/j.jvb.2008.09.008 . Ryan , L. , R. Coyne , C. Heary , et al. 2023 . “ Weight Stigma Experienced by Patients With Obesity in Healthcare Settings: A Qualitative Evidence Synthesis .” Obesity Reviews 24 , no. 10 : e13606 . 10.1111/obr.13606 . 37533183 Sagi‐Dain , L. , M. Echar , and N. P.‐ Davis . 2022 . “ Experiences of Weight Stigmatization in the Israeli Healthcare System Among Overweight and Obese Individuals .” Israel Journal of Health Policy Research 11 , no. 5 : 5 . 10.1186/s13584-022-00518-9 . 35101130 PMC8802507 Saint Pol , T. 2010 . Le corps désirable: hommes et femmes face à leur poids . PUF . Salazar , S. G . 2020 . “ Léxico e ideología sobre la gordofobia en la comunicación digital .” Círculo de Lingüística Aplicada a la Comunicación 83 : 93 – 107 . 10.5209/clac.70566 . SturtzSreetharan , C. , A. Brewis , J. Hardin , S. Trainer , and A. Wutich . 2021 . Fat in Four Cultures: A Global Ethnography of Weight . Toronto University Press . Trainer , S. , C. SturtzSreetharan , A. Wutich , A. Brewis , and J. Hardin . 2021 . “ Fat Is All My Fault: Globalized Metathemes of Body Self‐Blame .” Medical Anthropology Quarterly 36 , no. 1 : 5 – 26 . 10.1111/maq.12687 . 35051296 Turner , V. 1974 . O Processo Ritual: Estrutura e Antiestrutura . Vozes . Wetzel , K. E. , and M. S. Himmelstein . 2023 . “ Health Care Avoidance as Vigilance: A Model of Maladaptive Eating Behaviors Due to Weight Stigma in Health Care, Avoidance, and Internalization Among Women .” Stigma and Health . Advance Online Publication. 10.1037/sah0000470 . Wu , Y. K. , and D. C. Berry . 2018 . “ Impact of Weight Stigma on Physiological and Psychological Health Outcomes for Overweight and Obese Adults: A Systematic Review .” Journal of Advanced Nursing 74 , no. 5 : 1030 – 1042 . 10.1111/jan.13511 . 29171076