pmc Obes Pillars Obes Pillars 4519 obpill Obesity Pillars 2667-3681 Elsevier PMC10662101 PMC10662101.1 10662101 10662101 37990664 10.1016/j.obpill.2022.100048 S2667-3681(22)00039-0 100048 1 Review: Clinical Practice Statement Medication-induced weight gain and advanced therapies for the child with overweight and obesity: An Obesity Medicine Association (OMA) Clinical Practice Statement 2022 Cuda Suzanne suzanne@alamocityhealthykid.com a Censani Marisa mac9232@med.cornell.edu b Kharofa Roohi Roohi.kharofa@cchmc.org c O'Hara Valerie voharado@gmail.com d Conroy Rushika Rushika.conroy@bhs.org e Williams Dominique R. Dominique.Williams@nationwidechildrens.org f Paisley Jennifer Jennifer.paisley@stelizabeth.com g Browne Allen F. allenbrowne@sbcglobal.net h Karjoo Sara skarjoo1@jhmi.edu i Browne Nancy T. nancytkacz@sbcglobal.net h ∗ a Alamo City Healthy Kids and Families, 1919 Oakwell Farms Parkway, Ste 145, San Antonio, TX, 78218, USA b Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, New York Presbyterian Hospital, Weill Cornell Medicine, 525 East 68th Street, Box 103, New York, NY, 10021, USA c Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine Center for Better Health &amp; Nutrition, The Heart Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA d Blue Hill, ME, USA e Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Baystate Children's Hospital Subspecialty Center, 50 Wason AvenueSpringfield, MA, 01107, USA f The Ohio State University College of Medicine Center for Healthy Weight and Nutrition, Nationwide Children's Hospital 700 Children's Drive LA, Suite 5F, Columbus, OH, 43215, USA g St Elizabeth Physician's Group Primary Care, 98 Elm Street Lawrenceburg, IN, 47025-2048, USA h 25 Andrews Avenue, Falmouth, ME, 04105, USA i Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital Pediatric Gastroenterology 501 6th Ave S St. Petersburg, FL, 33701, USA ∗ Corresponding author. nancytkacz@sbcglobal.net 12 2022 05 12 2022 4 449531 100048 30 11 2022 30 11 2022 05 12 2022 21 11 2023 13 10 2024 © 2022 The Authors 2022 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). Background This Obesity Medicine Association (OMA) Clinical Practice Statement (CPS) details medication-induced weight gain and advanced therapies for the child with overweight or obesity. Methods The scientific information and clinical guidance in this CPS are based on scientific evidence, supported by the medical literature, and derived from the clinical perspectives of the authors. Results This OMA Clinical Practice Statement addresses medication-induced weight gain and advanced therapies for the child with overweight or obesity. Conclusions This OMA Clinical Practice Statement on medication induced-weight gain and advanced therapies for the child with overweight or obesity is an overview of current recommendations. These recommendations provide a roadmap to the improvement of the health of children and adolescents with obesity, especially those with metabolic, physiological, and psychological complications. This CPS also addresses treatment recommendations. This section is designed to help the provider with clinical decision making. Keywords Advanced therapies Children Obesity Anti-obesity medication pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement no pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY-NC-ND 1 Introduction The purpose of this clinical practice statement (CPS) regarding medication-induced weight gain and advanced therapies for the child with overweight or obesity is to provide clinicians with tools to clinically assess and manage children with obesity. The Obesity Medicine Association (OMA) is an organization of providers in the field of obesity medicine dedicated to the comprehensive care of patients with obesity. OMA members are physicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and other healthcare providers who take a comprehensive, evidence-based approach to treating obesity. This approach is comprised of four pillars: nutrition, physical activity, behavior, and medication. While it is hoped many clinicians may find the recommendations in this CPS helpful, the final decision regarding the optimal care of the patient with overweight or obesity depends on the individual clinical presentation and the judgment of the treating clinician. Clinicians should construct a treatment plan through shared decision making with the patient, keeping the patient's best interest at the forefront of all decisions. The practice of pediatric healthcare has a long-standing, proud tradition. Clinicians who care for this vulnerable population know that decisions may have long-term implications [ 1 ]. Providing the best, timely, evidence-based care for children is simultaneously preventative and interventional. Clinicians in the field of pediatric obesity medicine now have advanced therapies to add to ongoing intensive lifestyle therapy (ILT). Caution in using new therapies should be balanced with reasons for “waiting” to treat. Clinicians should challenge beliefs about age and other restrictions: clinical decision making should consider obesity similarly to other chronic conditions, i.e., cancer, asthma, congenital heart disease, or any chronic condition threatening short- and long-term health. When will longitudinal medical chart documentation of body mass index (BMI) over the 95th percentile (obesity) without intervention or effectual treatment (as based on current pediatric obesity guidelines) be recognized as a delay in diagnosis and treatment? The following sections will discuss advanced therapies available to children with the disease of obesity through the lens of this and other challenging questions [ 2 , 3 ]. Fig. 1 shows the interactions of advanced therapies. 2 Foundational, continuous core treatment for children with obesity 2.1 Intensive lifestyle therapy (ILT) The bedrock of treatment for obesity in children and adults is intensive lifestyle therapy (ILT). ILT includes baseline and ongoing evaluation and education on a multitude of potential effectors of obesity. Table 1 summarizes the basic components of ILT although other factors found in a thorough history (including psychosocial) and physical examination may be present [ [4] , [5] , [6] , [7] , [8] , [9] ]. The effects of trauma, social determinants of health, and other “upstream factors” [ 10 ] that may lead to the cascade of chronic stress sequelae are emerging [ 7 , 11 ]. A multitude of psychosocial factors such as weight-based bullying, teasing, and microaggressions can have a profound impact on the individual's ability to manage energy, body composition, and weight [ 4 ].The foundational interventions of ILT may be adequate to improve weight status in a subset of individuals with obesity. For many others, these foundational treatments will require the addition of one or more advanced obesity therapies to achieve results [ 12 ]. Advanced obesity therapies are never used in isolation of the foundational therapies (ILT). Since obesity is a chronic disease which may plateau or progress over time, adjustments to all modes of available therapy, both foundational and advanced, are considered at every patient encounter. 2.2 Assessment of medication induced weight gain for the child with overweight or obesity Pharmacotherapy administered for any clinical indication can produce known, or unknown/unintended side effects. Potential effects on weight status are weight promoting, weight neutral, and weight sparing. Ideally, clinicians will prescribe weight neutral medications and monitor for the desired effect to the prescribed condition. Whenever possible, clinicians strive to replace a weight promoting medication with another effective medication that does not promote weight gain. When the best therapy requires a medication with the side effect of weight gain, consideration of consultation with an obesity medicine specialist and/or adding a mitigating medication like metformin or topiramate should be considered. Patients who gain excessive weight and/or develop metabolic disease after starting weight promoting medications should be carefully assessed by all care providers for optimal management. In this section, medications and alternatives are discussed for common medical conditions as they pertain to potential weight gain. 2.2.1 Central nervous system (CNS) agents Many medications that act through the central nervous system (CNS) can be related to changes in weight. Medication classes in this category include atypical anti-psychotics, anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs), mood/depression drugs, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) medications, and anti-depressants. Table 2 gives an overview of CNS drugs including medication classes and examples. 2.2.2 Antipsychotic medications 2.2.2.1 Incidence and associations Antipsychotic prescriptions in children have increased significantly over the past two decades [ 15 ]. Second generation antipsychotics such as olanzapine, clozapine, risperidone, and aripiprazole are of particular concern and account for most of the increase in prescribing. Up to 80% of children show significant weight gain when taking antipsychotics [ 16 ]. 2.2.2.2 Risk factors for weight gain Adolescents are at greater risk of weight gain from antipsychotic medications than adults [ 17 ]. The specific medication with the highest weight gain is olanzapine, followed by clozapine, risperidone, and aripiprazole [ 18 ]. There are some differences according to diagnosis; for example, patients with autism who are treated with second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs) tend to have greater weight gain than patients with alternate diagnoses using SGAs [ 19 ]. Patients who are older, have a lower baseline BMI z-score, are male, or have a diagnosis of a mood disorder also experience more SGA-induced weight gain [ 20 ]. 2.2.2.3 Risk factors for diabetes The atypical antipsychotic medications risperidone and aripiprazole are approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in young children (risperidone age 5 years; aripiprazole age 6 years) [ 19 ]. Both of these medications are known to cause weight gain, and greater cumulative exposure is associated with an increased risk for developing type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) [ 21 ]. 2.2.2.4 Treatment of weight gain complications Metformin may be minimally effective in decreasing the weight gain associated with atypical antipsychotic use [ 22 ]. Prior studies have looked at metformin to mitigate weight gain associated with atypical antipsychotic therapy in children [ 23 ]. Although a small study, Anagnostou et al. performed a randomized clinical trial in children and adolescents with ASD aged 6–17 years [ 22 ]. Study findings showed metformin reduced BMI z -scores from baseline to week 16 significantly more than placebo. In the study, metformin was titrated up to 500 mg twice daily for children aged 6–9 years and 850 mg twice daily for those 10–17 years (dosing for weight gain due to atypical antipsychotics is different than dosing for T2DM) [ 22 ]. 2.2.3 Antiepileptic drugs (AED) 2.2.3.1 Incidence and associations In the last two decades, more than 11 new antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) have been introduced to the market. Several AEDs are associated with weight gain such as gabapentin, pregabalin, valproic acid (VPA), and vigabatrin, and to some extent carbamazepine (CBZ) [ 24 , 25 ]. Others are weight neutral, such as lamotrigine (LTG), levetiracetam, and phenytoin, or associated with slight weight loss, e.g., felbamate [ 25 ]. Topiramate, not a new medication, is another anti-epileptic drug associated with weight loss as discussed below. 2.2.3.2 Risk factors for weight gain Weight gain occurs in approximately 40% of children taking VPA; of children treated with VPA, 38% gained more than 10% of their body weight compared with 8% treated with lamotrigine [ 25 ]. Hyperinsulinemia and hyperleptinemia are also common with VPA and are markedly elevated in children with epilepsy who gained weight [ 26 ]. The mechanism of action is likely a rise in insulin and insulin/glucose with VPA treatment, which possibly stimulates appetite. Neither hyperinsulinemia nor hyperleptinemia are seen with CBZ or LTG. 2.2.3.3 Special considerations Topiramate and zonisamide are the two AEDs associated with weight loss [ 27 ]. Topiramate significantly reduces adiposity, reduces leptin/adiponectin ratios, and markedly increases the serum level of adiponectin; it also increases energy metabolism, resulting in weight loss since adiponectin plays a significant role in metabolic regulations [ 28 ]. Topiramate has been used, like metformin, to help mitigate weight gain when a weight promoting medication cannot be replaced [ 29 ]. 2.2.3.4 Treatment of weight gain complications Weight gain is a common adverse effect of many AEDs. Since AEDs are often required for extended periods of time, clinicians treating children with obesity who also need an AED should carefully select an AED or modify an existing one if the AED contributes to the disease of obesity. 2.2.4 Mood stabilizers 2.2.4.1 Incidence and associations Mood stabilizers are medications used in the treatment of bipolar disorder in children and adolescents. They can be divided into traditional agents, including lithium, valproate, and carbamazepine, and newer agents, including the anticonvulsants lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine, topiramate, and gabapentin. Mood stabilizers are often used as second-line choices behind atypical antipsychotics (e.g., olanzapine, clozapine, quetiapine, risperidone and aripiprazole) due to lower comparable efficacy. 2.2.4.2 Risk factors for weight gain Data regarding body composition and fasting metabolic effects of mood stabilizers in pediatric bipolar disorder are sparse. However, combining antipsychotics with mood stabilizers seems to lead to greater weight gain than treatment with mood stabilizers alone [ 19 , 30 , 31 ]. 2.2.4.3 Special considerations Recently, there has been a resurgence of interest in lithium treatment for bipolar disorder due to its unique anti-suicidal and neuro-protective effects. Lithium may be less effective than risperidone for treating chronic mixed/manic symptoms in young children but comparable to anticonvulsants [ 30 ]. However, in comparison, risperidone was associated with higher weight gain and higher prolactin levels than lithium [ 29 ]. 2.2.4.4 Treatment of weight gain complications Some reports indicate that topiramate may be useful as an add-on therapy to induce weight loss in patients who have experienced psychotropic-induced weight gain [ 29 ]. In addition, amantadine appears to stabilize weight gain related to psychotropic medications. Amantadine may also help decrease BMI with continued usage, but controlled trials are lacking to date. Fig. 2 shows a summary of the potential impact of antidepressants and mood stabilizers. 2.2.5 Diabetes medications 2.2.5.1 Incidence and associations The SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study (2002–2012) found that the rate of newly diagnosed cases of T2DM increased by 4.8% each year [ 34 ]. Since T2DM in youth was only recognized in recent years, natural history is limited. Until recently, only metformin and insulin were FDA approved for use under age 18 years. In 2019, the use of the glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) agonist liraglutide was approved as an add-on therapy to treat T2DM in children 10 years or older who have been receiving metformin with or without basal insulin [ 35 ]. The mechanism of action (MOA) of liraglutide is that it mimics the action of the GLP-1 incretin, which stimulates post-prandial insulin secretion, reduces glucagon secretion, delays gastric emptying, and induces weight loss through reduction of hunger and food intake [ [36] , [37] , [38] ]. 2.2.5.2 Risk factors for weight gain There is relatively little pediatric data on different insulin regimens, but all seem to have equal efficacy. Insulin and insulin analogs (such as insulin glargine) can cause excessive weight gain in adolescents [ 39 ]. Sulfonylureas are not commonly used in pediatric patients and can cause weight gain [ 40 ]. 2.2.5.3 Special considerations Metformin has been proven effective in the management of T2DM in adolescents [ 41 ]. Metformin decreases hepatic glucose output and enhances primarily hepatic and muscle insulin sensitivity without a direct effect on beta cell function. Metformin has the advantage of weight reduction and a decrease in lipids without the risk of hypoglycemia. See section 3.3.2 for further details about metformin. Among thiazolidinediones (TZD), rosiglitazone and pioglitazone are the only remaining drugs from the TZD family in clinical use; rosiglitazone was used in the TODAY study [ 42 , 43 ]. Although there are only a handful of studies on GLP-1 receptor agonists, such as liraglutide, semaglutide, exenatide, lixisenatide, and dulaglutide, several trials are currently underway with both daily and once weekly agents. To date, results of trials using GLP-1 receptor agonists are showing decreases in HbA1c in patients with T2DM that are as good or better than results from adult studies. In section 3.2.1 we discuss results of a recent trial using Semaglutide in adolescents for weight loss. The TODAY study showed that around 50% of youth with T2DM fail monotherapy with metformin within 11.5 months of treatment initiation; early combination therapy was preferred in pediatric patients with T2DM over waiting for the failure of metformin monotherapy [ [42] , [43] , [44] ]. 2.2.6 Migraine medications 2.2.6.1 Incidence and associations There is a positive association between headache and obesity among children [ 45 ]. The prevalence of migraines is increased in those with obesity, and risk increases with increasing obesity status [ 45 ]. There is overlap between migraine pathophysiology and the central and peripheral pathways regulating feeding; specifically, neurotransmitters like serotonin, peptides such as orexin, and adipocytokines (adiponectin and leptin) may have roles in both feeding and migraine [ 46 ]. 2.2.6.2 Risk factors for weight gain Risk of weight gain depends on the type of drug taken for migraines and the drug class. Drug classes and their associations with changes in weight are shown in Table 3 . 2.2.6.3 Special considerations Topiramate is, generally, a well-tolerated migraine therapy in children that tends to result in weight loss [ 48 ]. Effective treatment dose range is between 100 and 200 mg/day [ 49 , 50 ]. Side effects of topiramate may include gastroenteritis, paresthesia, concentration difficulty, somnolence, or cognitive impairment [ 50 ]. Due to the low dose required for treatment of migraine, topiramate can be a good choice for the pediatric population due to its efficacy and the low frequency of side effects [ 48 ]. Use of Topiramate is limited in adolescent females due to its teratogenic potential. See section 3.4.1 for further details on topiramate. 2.2.6.4 Treatment of weight gain complications Recognizing and avoiding trigger factors for migraine, in combination with a suitable therapy strategy that is not weight positive, may improve quality of life for a child with migraines. Psychological and physical triggers for migraine often include stress, anxiety, depression, fatigue, fever, illness, poor sleep habits, irregular meals, fasting, hypoglycemia, and dehydration [ 51 , 52 ]. An important part of prophylactic treatment in pediatric migraine is psychological support. 2.3 Endocrine agents Endocrine agents that may lead to medication-related weight gain include insulin and insulin analogs, glucocorticoids, and hormonal contraceptives; an overview is shown in Table 4 [ [53] , [54] , [55] , [56] , [57] ]. For adult patients with obesity and T2DM requiring insulin, it is recommended to prescribe at least one weight loss-promoting medication, such as metformin, pramlintide, or a GLP-1 agonist, to decrease the weight gain associated with insulin administration [ 53 ]. If no alternative medications are available, weight gain can be prevented or decreased by choosing the lowest medication dose to produce clinical efficacy for the shortest duration necessary during treatment [ 53 ]. The presumptive clinical advantages of basal analogs compared with shorter acting insulins include reduced injection burden, better efficacy, lower risk of hypoglycemic episodes (especially nocturnal), and mildly reduced weight gain [ 58 ]. In incidentally diagnosed or metabolically stable pediatric patients with HbA1c &lt;8.5% and who are asymptomatic, metformin is recommended by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) as the initial pharmacologic treatment of choice in the setting of normal renal function. If glycemic targets are not being met with metformin with or without incorporation of basal insulin, GLP-1 agonist liraglutide should be considered in children ≥10 years of age if there is no medical history or family history of medullary thyroid carcinoma or multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 present [ 59 ]. 2.4 Other medication classes Medication-related weight gain may also occur with medications for hypertension/cardiovascular drugs, antihistamines, sleep aids, and chemotherapy medications [ [60] , [61] , [62] , [63] ]. Examples are shown in Table 5 . 2.5 Summary of medication induced weight gain section 2.5.1 ADHD, anti-seizure, migraine, diabetes, and others The typical impacts on weight of various medications for ADHD, seizures, migraine, diabetes, and more are shown in Table 6 . 2.5.2 Psychiatric medications Psychiatric medications and their impact on weight are shown in Table 7 . 2.5.3 Miscellaneous medications A review of miscellaneous medications and their impact on weight is shown in Table 8 . 2.5.4 Takeaways The top takeaway messages from the OMA regarding medication-induced weight gain in the child with overweight or obesity are shown in Table 9 . 3 Advanced Therapies for Children with Obesity and Severe Obesity In this section, we discuss advanced therapeutic interventions that can be added either solely with or in combination to ILT efforts. Although there is little literature on timing of implementation of these advanced therapies, ILT continues as an uninterrupted baseline intervention with the addition of any advanced therapy to meet the need of the patient's disease status rather than any specific timeline. 3.1 Pharmacotherapy: FDA approved for indication of obesity in children and adults 3.1.1 Phentermine/topiramate Phentermine/topiramate is FDA approved for the indication of obesity in patients 12 years and older ( Table 10 ) [ 79 ]. The MOA of phentermine/topiramate is appetite suppression. Phentermine stimulates the hypothalamus, leading to the release of norepinephrine while topiramate's actions are multimodal; enhances γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) release while inhibiting α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and N-methyl- d -aspartic acid or N-methyl- d -aspartate (NMDA) [ 63 ]. A recent randomized, double-blind study of 56-week duration evaluated the efficacy of phentermine/topiramate in adolescents 12–17 years of age. The percent change in BMI at week 56 showed difference from placebo of −10.44% points for the top dose and −8.11% points in those treated with the mid-dose of phentermine/topiramate [ 80 ]. Phentermine/topiramate is contraindicated for patients who are pregnant, who have taken monoamine oxidase inhibitors within 14 days, who have glaucoma or hyperthyroidism, or who have hypersensitivity or idiosyncrasy to sympathomimetic amines [ 79 ]. Notably, phentermine/topiramate has a black-box warning for worsening of depression in patients who are 18–24 years old. Adverse reactions may include paresthesia, dizziness, dysgeusia, insomnia, constipation, dry mouth, suicidal ideation, and possible seizures if the medication is discontinued abruptly [ 79 ]. Patients should avoid alcohol while using phentermine/topiramate [ 79 ]. Topiramate also has a teratogenic effect requiring a discussion to ensure protection against an unplanned pregnancy. 3.1.2 Phentermine Phentermine is FDA approved in children greater than 16 years for weight loss ( Table 10 ) [ 81 ]. Duration of therapy varies based on state statutes. The MOA of phentermine is appetite suppression via stimulation of the hypothalamus to release norepinephrine. Weight loss with phentermine tends to be small or moderate (i.e., weight loss in excess of placebo is between 5 and 7.8%) [ 63 ]. Phentermine may cause anxiety, tremors, and a mild increase in blood pressure (BP); patients should be routinely monitored for pulse, BP, and side effects every 6–8 weeks (more frequent monitoring may be needed during titration) [ 81 ]. Phentermine should not be used in combination with fenfluramine or dexfenfluramine and is contraindicated in patients with serious regurgitant cardiac valvular disease [ 81 ]. Use phentermine cautiously in patients with hypertension (monitor closely for an increase in BP) and those with severe renal impairment. If the patient's glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is less than 30 mL/min, limit the dose of phentermine to 15 mg daily. Avoid phentermine use if the GFR is less than 15 mL/min. Phentermine is listed as a FDA Pregnancy Category X medication (medication contraindicated during pregnancy). No animal studies have been conducted, and no studies have been done in nursing mothers. While FDA-approval is for use up to 12 weeks, adult studies support longer-term use (&gt;12 months), with risk of negative cardiovascular disease outcomes and/or death being rare (0.3%) [ 82 ]. 3.1.3 Liraglutide Liraglutide is FDA approved for management of obesity in adolescents ages 12–17 years and adults ( Table 10 ) [ 83 ]. Liraglutide is also FDA approved for T2DM in children 10 years and older (as a separate formulation) [ 35 ]. Liraglutide is a GLP-1 receptor agonist given via daily injection. Liraglutide's MOA mimics the action of the GLP-1 incretin, which stimulates post-prandial insulin secretion, reduces glucagon secretion, delays gastric emptying, and induces weight loss through reduction of hunger and food intake while increasing satiety. Average weight loss over placebo is 7% [ 84 ]. Common side effects of liraglutide include gastrointestinal symptoms (abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea) and hypoglycemia [ 83 ]. Liraglutide is contraindicated in patients with a personal or family history of medullary thyroid carcinoma or in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome type 2 (MEN2) [ 83 ]. 3.1.4 Orlistat Orlistat is FDA approved in children ages 12 years and older ( Table 10 ) [ 85 ]. Orlistat is a reversible inhibitor of gastric and pancreatic lipases, thus inhibiting absorption of dietary fats by 30% (MOA). Weight loss with orlistat is usually small (2.9–3.4%) [ 86 ]. Side effects preclude usage in most patients; side effects include oily rectal leakage, abdominal pain, flatulence with discharge, bowel urgency, and steatorrhea [ 85 ]. Orlistat is contraindicated in patients who are pregnant, breastfeeding, have chronic malabsorption syndrome or cholestasis [ 85 ]. 3.1.5 Setmelanotide Setmelanotide is FDA approved for children over 6 years of age and adults (≥18 years) for the following rare genetic causes of obesity: proopiomelanocortin (POMC) deficiency, proprotein convertase 1(PCSK1) deficiency, and leptin receptor (LEPR) deficiency ( Table 10 ) [ 87 , 88 ]. In June 2022, the indication for setmelanotide was extended by the FDA to include patients with Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS). Setmelanotide can also be utilized for patients with variants in POMC, PCSK1, LEPR, or BBS genes considered pathogenic, likely pathogenic, or of uncertain significance (compound heterozygous) [ 89 ]. Clinical trials are ongoing for other rare genetic disorders associated with obesity, including POMC epigenetic disorders and other melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) pathway heterozygous deficiency-related obesity [ 90 , 91 ]. Setmelanotide is a melanocortin 4 (MC4R) receptor agonist. By reestablishing the MC4R activity, setmelanotide allows for reduced hunger. The medication is given as a once daily injection. Reduction in weight from baseline ranges from 9.7% (patients with LEPR) to 23.1% (patients with POMC or PCSK1) at one year [ 91 ]. Side effects include the potential for hyperpigmentation, gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g.: abdominal pain, constipation, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting), changes in the central nervous system (e.g.: depression, dizziness, fatigue, headache, insomnia, vertigo) and prolonged penile erections [ 87 , 91 ]. 3.2 Pharmacotherapy: FDA approved for indication of obesity in patients 18 years of age or older. 3.2.1 Semaglutide Semaglutide, a GLP-1 agonist, is FDA approved for obesity in patients ≥18 years of age with a BMI greater than 30 and or a BMI greater than 27 with at least one obesity-driven disease ( Table 10 ) [ 92 ]. Semaglutide is also FDA approved for T2DM in a separate formulation. Semaglutide is not currently FDA approved for children, but the STEP 4 Trial for Teens closed in March 2022 and the study results were published in November 2022. In this study, with semaglutide alone, the mean change in BMI from baseline to week 68 was −16.1%. Sixty two percent (62%) of the participants in the semaglutide group achieved a loss of body weight of at least 10%; in addition, 37% of subjects using semaglutide achieved weight loss of at least 20% [ 44 ]. Of note, this trial showed a better treatment effect in adolescents than seen in trials with adults. Semaglutide is given as a once weekly injection. The MOA of semaglutide acts by multiple mechanisms including increased insulin secretion, inhibition of glucagon release and gluconeogenesis, delayed gastric emptying, and reduced appetite and energy intake. The STEP trial in adults showed that the weight loss above placebo was 12.4% (confidence interval 11.5–13.4%) [ [93] , [94] , [95] ]. Side effects of semaglutide include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea (particularly with dose titration), headache, and fatigue [ 92 ]. Contraindications include a personal or family history of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome type 2 (MEN2) [ 92 ]. 3.2.2 Naltrexone/bupropion Naltrexone/bupropion is FDA approved for weight loss in patients ≥18 years of age with a BMI greater than 30 or with a BMI greater than 27 with at least one obesity driven disease ( Table 10 ) [ 96 ]. It is not approved for pediatric use. The MOA of naltrexone/bupropion's is as a reuptake inhibitor of norepinephrine and dopamine (bupropion) and opioid antagonist (naltrexone). Weight loss over placebo for naltrexone/bupropion ranges from 4.8 to 6.0% [ 97 , 98 ]. The advantages of naltrexone/bupropion over other medications are its use in treating food addiction and data over several years. Common side effects of naltrexone/bupropion include nausea, constipation, headache, vomiting, and dizziness; concerns associated with naltrexone/bupropion are a potential worsening of depression and/or suicidal ideation in youth; the medication carries a black box warning [ 96 ]. Contraindications include uncontrolled hypertension, seizure disorders, anorexia, bulimia, drug or alcohol withdrawal, and monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) usage [ 96 ]. 3.3 Pharmacotherapy: FDA approved for type 2 diabetes mellitus 3.3.1 Tirzepatide Tirzepatide is FDA approved for T2DM for patients 18 years and older ( Table 10 ) [ 99 ]. Tirzepatide was evaluated for management of obesity in the 2022 SURMOUNT-1 trial, but is not yet FDA approved for obesity in adults or children [ 100 ]. In the SURMOUNT-1 trial, mean weight loss above placebo ranged from 11.9% (low dose, 5-mg) to 17.8% (high dose, 15-mg) [ 100 ]. Tirzepatide is given via a once weekly injection. The MOA is dual agonism at glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP) and GLP-1 receptors, which contribute to the glycemic and weight control effects of this medication [ 101 ]. GIP regulates energy balance through cell-surface signaling in the brain and adipose tissue. This activation works synergistically with GLP-1 receptor activation to allow for greater weight reduction. Tirzepatide enhances first- and second-phase insulin secretion, reduces glucagon levels (both in glucose dependent manner) and slows gastric emptying, which reduces appetite. The most common side effects are gastrointestinal (GI) issues including nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea that occur primarily during dose escalation. Other side effects include cholelithiasis, injection site reaction, and fatigue. Tirzepatide is contraindicated in patients with a personal or family history of medullary thyroid carcinoma, MEN2, pancreatitis, or a known hypersensitivity to Tirzepatide [ 100 ]. 3.3.2 Metformin Metformin is FDA approved in adults and children 10 years and older for T2DM ( Table 10 ) [ 102 ]. Metformin provides a very modest reduction in weight (about 2.5% over placebo) when combined with lifestyle interventions over short time periods [ 103 , 104 ]. Metformin is often used to mitigate weight gain side effects of other medications, such as atypical antipsychotics [ 105 ] and may have a role in aiding patients with prediabetes and/or a strong family history of T2DM as well as patients with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). The MOA for weight loss with metformin is increased sensitivity to insulin and leptin, which decreases hunger. Metformin may also increase secretion of the GLP-1 hormone [ 102 ]. The dose in adolescents, if tolerated, should be the maximum recommended dose of 1000 mg twice a day (BID) to take advantage of the effect of decreasing appetite. Side effects may include GI upset, especially in the first few weeks, which can be managed with dose titration and extended-release formulations. Long-term use has been associated with Vitamin B12 deficiency and monitoring is recommended. Lactic acidosis, while rare, is also possible (increased risk in patients with renal dysfunction). Contraindications include severe renal dysfunction (estimated GFR less than 30 mL/minute/1.73 m 2 ) and acute or chronic metabolic acidosis [ 102 ]. 3.3.3 Exenatide Exenatide is FDA approved for T2DM in children 10–17 years of age and in adults ( Table 10 ) [ 106 ]. Its MOA is the slowing of gastric motility, which suppresses appetite. In a small randomized controlled trial of 10 mcg BID, exenatide produced a reduction of BMI (4%) and body weight in adolescents with severe obesity [ 107 ]. There was a slight rebound of BMI after down titration of dose followed by recovery when dose increased again. Preliminary evidence suggests that higher doses for prolonged periods of time may be necessary for weight loss. Side effects include GI symptoms: (abdominal pain or nausea, vomiting, diarrhea), decreased appetite, dyspepsia, fatigue, and hypoglycemia. Contraindications include MEN2, serious hypersensitivity reactions, pancreatitis, or a family history of medullary thyroid carcinoma [ 108 ]. 3.3.4 Dulaglutide Dulaglutide is FDA approved for T2DM in patients 18 years and older ( Table 10 ) [ 109 ]. However, it is not approved for weight loss in adults or children [ 110 ]. Dulaglutide is a GLP-1 receptor agonist. With regards to degree of weight loss, data from the AWARD-11 trial demonstrate that half of patients on the higher dose of dulaglutide (4.5mg) experienced ≥5% weight reduction [ 111 ]. Common side effects include GI disorders (abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea), decreased appetite, dyspepsia, fatigue, and hypoglycemia. Contraindications include MEN2, serious hypersensitivity reactions, pancreatitis, or a family history of medullary thyroid carcinoma [ 109 ]. 3.4 Pharmacotherapy: other indications 3.4.1 Topiramate Topiramate is not FDA indicated in children for weight loss alone (it was FDA approved in 2022 as a combination with phentermine for use in patients aged 12–17 years; Table 10 ) [ 79 ]. Topiramate is FDA approved for seizure control in children ages 2 years and older and migraine prophylaxis in children 12 year and older. The MOA for weight loss may be its effects on appetite suppression and satiety enhancement, which could be based on a combination of potential mechanisms: block of neuronal voltage-dependent sodium channels, enhancement of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) activity, antagonizing α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)/kainite glutamate receptors, and weak inhibition of carbonic anhydrase. Topiramate may also control food cravings [ 28 , 66 , 112 ]. Studies in adolescents show a mean change in BMI between 2 and 4.9% [ 66 ]. Contraindications include hyperthyroidism, glaucoma, and use during or within 14 days following MAOI therapy [ 50 ]. Topiramate should not be used in combination with a ketogenic diet. It is also contraindicated in pregnancy (associated with cleft lip and/or palate) [ 113 ]. As such, patients should be counseled, referred for contraceptive management when appropriate, and routine urine human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) monitoring should be performed. Side effects include paresthesia of extremities, cognitive disruption (confusion, difficulty concentrating), and worsening depression; monitor patients for suicidal ideation [ 50 ]. 3.4.2 Lisdexamfetamine Lisdexamfetamine (LDX) was FDA approved for ADHD in children in 2007, but it is not approved for the indication of weight loss ( Table 10 ) [ 114 ]. LDX was also FDA approved for binge-eating disorder (BED) in adults in 2015 (50–75 mg/day) [ 114 ]. The MOA of LDX is that it hydrolyzes to release the active drug, d -amphetamine, which inhibits reuptake of dopamine (DA) and/or norepinephrine (NE) and enhances release of DA, NE, and serotonin. LDX may decrease pathological overeating and therefore treat BED. There are no adult or pediatric weight loss trials for lisdexamfetamine. Side effects may include decreased appetite, insomnia, headache, GI upset, and irritability. Patients are monitored for cardiovascular changes such as increased BP or pulse. Contraindications include MAOI use. LDX is a Scheduled II controlled drug; prescribing rules apply as with other stimulants [ 114 ]. 3.4.3 Bupropion Bupropion is FDA approved for depression, seasonal affective disorder, and smoking cessation in adults, but it is not an FDA approved indication for the treatment of weight loss or obesity ( Table 10 ) [ 115 ]. Bupropion belongs to the aminoketone class of antidepressants, which are unrelated to SSRIs. Bupropion moderates the levels and activity of the neuro-transmitters norepinephrine and dopamine; however, its exact MOA for treating depression is uncertain. Net weight losses (compared with placebo) were 2.2% and 5.1% for bupropion SR 300mg and 400 mg, respectively (double-blind study, 48 months) [ 116 ]. Bupropion has a black box warning for the worsening of depression in patients 18–24 years of age. It may increase risk of seizures, particularly in patients with epilepsy or eating disorders such as bulimia or anorexia nervosa [ 115 ]. 3.5 Pharmacotherapy summary Table 10 shows a summary of pharmacotherapies including indications, medications, and minimum patient ages. 3.6 Emerging bariatric technologies (EBT) Emerging technologies are classified as devices or endoscopic procedures. Clinical researchers continue to devise and evaluate emerging bariatric techniques in the hopes of adding therapeutic options that are increasingly safer, cost-effective, and more accessible to a wider group of patients [ 117 , 118 ]. 3.6.1 EBT: devices Devices target a variety of physiologic mechanisms implicated in energy dysregulation. These mechanisms include change of pressures in the stomach, change of gastric emptying rates, neuromodulation, and bypassing duodenal absorption of nutrients. Devices typically are swallowed or placed endoscopically or laparoscopically. Fig. 3 lists many of the device categories [ [119] , [120] , [121] , [122] , [123] , [124] ]. Note: Adjustable gastric band is sometimes listed with metabolic and bariatric surgery options. It is listed here as a device as it is removable and adjustable. Advantages to using a device include: they are adjustable, removable, temporary, and easy to combine with pharmacotherapy and ILT. Because they are temporary, devices can potentially be a bridge to more invasive therapies if the patient is unable to tolerate an advanced therapy (such as MBS) due to present weight and existing obesity driven diseases. Devices can be placed synchronously (two balloons for example) or sequentially expanding the therapeutic possibilities. Devices are not without their challenges. While being used and studied globally in adults, there is limited data on use, safety and efficacy in adolescents and children. Thus, no devices are FDA approved for adolescents and children in the US. Insurance coverage is rare. Because of plasticity in children's developmental programming, the minimally invasive and reversible nature of devices may make their use in youth potentially safer and more effective compared to other advanced therapies [ 125 ]. Despite these attractive aspects, there has been significant delay in studying these unique therapeutic options in children. Fig. 4 , Fig. 5 , Fig. 6 , Fig. 7 show individual devices for weight management. 3.6.2 EBT: endoscopic procedures The second category of EBT are endoscopic procedures. The two most prominent are the endoscopic gastroplasty (ESG) and duodenal mucosal resurfacing (DMR). ESG is similar to laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (suturing of stomach into a tube along its long axis) but without gastric resection, and DMR involves thermal ablation of duodenal mucosa affecting duodenal absorption, specifically improvement in glycemia in adults with T2DM [ 126 , 127 ]. Endoscopic procedures are considered less invasive than metabolic and bariatric surgery. However, challenges include lack of FDA approval in pediatrics, delays in study of safety and efficacy in children, and limited data in the pediatric population [ 127 ]. 3.7 Metabolic &amp; bariatric surgery (MBS) Metabolic and bariatric surgery (MBS) is considered an advanced treatment of severe obesity and resulting obesity-related complications [ 128 ]. MBS with the foundation of ILT may be used alone or in combination with anti-obesity pharmacotherapy [ 129 ]. The safety and efficacy of MBS in adolescents have been established in single and multi-institutional studies managed by multidisciplinary groups utilizing ILT support throughout preoperative and postoperative care [ 130 ]. Outcomes of MBS in both adult and adolescent studies show similar results including improvement and resolution of obesity driven diseases [ 131 ]. A recent report analyzed trends in adolescent metabolic and bariatric procedures over 15 years finding a significant increase in use of MBS in adolescents although concluding that MBS remains underutilized [ 132 ]. MBS guidelines in the pediatric population provide clinical direction for this treatment modality [ 128 , 133 ]. 3.7.1 Indications for MBS in the pediatric population Overview of patient selection for MBS in the pediatric population [ 128 , 133 ]: • A BMI ≥120% of the 95th percentile with an obesity driven disease or BMI ≥140% of the 95th percentile regardless of comorbidity are used when using weight as guide. • Tanner stage and linear growth should not be used to determine readiness for adolescent MBS. • Adolescents are defined by the World Health Organization's definition of 10- to 19-years old, but younger children who meet the other criteria including physiologic &amp; psychologic obesity driven diseases should be considered when benefit outweighs risk • MBS is considered for youth of any age, pubertal status, cognitive or intellectual disability with severe obesity and significant obesity driven disease. 3.7.2 Outcomes of MBS in pediatric population Published US and international data of the safety and efficacy of MBS outcomes are now approaching 20-year follow-up. Research includes 2 multi-institutional consortiums. See Fig. 8 for highlighted results of these studies. 3.7.3 Recommendations for MBS in pediatric population Best practice guidelines recommend the following principles and understanding when utilizing MBS in the pediatric population [ 128 , 133 ]: • Obesity is a chronic disease requiring a combination of ongoing multimodal therapies and treatment by a team led by a pediatric obesity medicine specialist. • Obesity increases the risk of T2DM, liver disease, dyslipidemia, sleep disorders, orthopedic conditions, and mental health conditions such as anxiety and depression. • Pediatric patients undergoing MBS need to be followed by their pediatric obesity medicine team pre- and postoperatively and transitioned when appropriate to adult obesity medicine specialists. • Pediatric patients should be counseled as developmentally appropriate on risks and benefits of MBS along with their family/caretakers. • Vertical sleeve gastrectomy is currently the most common MBS operation for adolescents; both Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass and vertical sleeve gastrectomy have similar risks and benefits in the pediatric population. See Fig. 9 , Fig. 10 below for details. • Follow-up is ongoing after MBS: o for potential adverse effects from surgery o obesity is a chronic disease and ongoing supportive care needs to be provided. • Counsel female patients about increased fertility after MBS. 3.8 Combination therapies Inadequate weight loss and weight regain are not uncommon in patients who undergo MBS. The chronic nature of the disease of obesity requires a range of therapeutic options to treat patients long-term. This range of multimodal therapies includes nutritional, activity, behavioral, pharmacologic, and surgical interventions, often in combination. Multiple studies demonstrate use of pharmacotherapy after surgical weight loss can result in over 50% of patients seeing an additional 5–15% post-surgical weight loss [ 136 , 137 ]. ILT and pharmacologic therapies used as adjuncts to surgical therapies may provide improved outcomes long term in the pediatric population and will require further study [ 138 ] ( Table 11 ). 4 Transition from pediatric to adult clinical healthcare Obesity is a chronic disease characterized by relapsing episodes of weight gain as the body struggles to return to its former set point of body composition. As with other chronic diseases of childhood, a plan of transition to adult obesity medicine specialists should be part of every pediatric obesity medicine care plan. Using principles from the chronic care model [ 139 , 140 ], plans for transition to adult care should begin early in pediatric obesity medicine management and be revised as needed as the child matures. Discussion of long-term health care is embedded in all treatment regimens as the clinical expectation is that intervention and follow-up will be needed long-term. Current literature guides the transition to adult obesity care, incorporating the following principles [ [141] , [142] , [143] ]: • Importance of youth/young adult centered strength-based focus • Emphasis on self-determination, self-management, and family/caregiver engagement • Acknowledgement of individual differences and complexities • Recognition of need for a distinct population health approach for youth/young adults • Need for early and ongoing preparation and integration into adult models of care • Importance of shared accountability, effective communication, and care coordination between pediatric and adult clinicians and systems of care • Recognition of the influences of cultural beliefs and attitudes as well as socio-economic status • Emphasis on achieving health equity and elimination of disparities • Need for parents and caregivers to support youth and young adults in building knowledge regarding their own health and skills in making health decisions and using health care 5 Considerations of pediatric obesity care in clinical practice 5.1 Goals As in any clinical encounter, particularly with patients with a known chronic disease, goals for the patient, family and the clinical management plan guide care specifically (the current encounter) and broadly (encounters over time). Short term or episodic goals will vary during treatment but many core goals will guide practice, particularly during the ebb and flow of chronic care management and with the unique pediatric aspect of growth and developmental stages. Family and clinical goals listed in Fig. 11 are intended to be a guide rather than an exhaustive list. 5.2 Early vs delayed intervention The age of the patient should not be the determining factor in the initiation of effective treatment. All medical treatments require full consideration of the risk/benefit ratio for any disease process with a respect for possible known or unknown side-effects. Armed with current evidence and clinical expertise, the clinician and patient/family discuss the use of any therapeutic in the context of the patient's evaluation and circumstances [ [6] , [7] , [8] , [9] ]. Through shared decision making, a treatment plan is devised and implemented. Once initiated, ongoing monitoring, evaluation, and redirection are key elements of all clinical care plans. Fig. 12 shows the expected pathway of early and delayed intervention with the disease of obesity demonstrating that the earlier the successful intervention, the less the risk of developing health consequences [ [144] , [145] , [146] , [147] ]. 5.3 Decision making: when to use advanced therapy of anti-obesity medications (AOM) The use of AOMs in children and adolescents is a shared clinical decision made between the health care provider, team, and the family/child. Decisions are based on current (and updated) clinical and psychosocial parameters assessed during initial and ongoing chronic care visits for obesity medicine care. Evidence does not support delays in pharmacotherapy while incorporating ILT interventions into therapeutic treatment plans [ 12 ]. A prospective study collecting data from 31 pediatric weight management programs across the US showed that early BMI reduction in the first month of treatment was found to be significantly associated with greater long-term reduction of BMI at 6 and 12 months (defined as a &gt;5% BMI reduction from baseline) in adolescents with obesity [ 145 ]. To meet the goal of improvement of the child's health, at least a 5% reduction in BMI percent of the 95th percentile is recommended [ 90 ]. Published literature finds that this percentage reduction is rarely achieved with lifestyle therapy alone [ 12 , 149 , 150 ]. If the child/adolescent's metabolic profile is in normal range despite their BMI percentile being over the 95th percentile, a family/clinician discussion should discuss the use and timing (if considered) of anti-obesity medication. Any obesity driven psychosocial consequences that the child is experiencing should be considered in all clinical decisions. Given the complex pathophysiology of the disease of obesity, as well as the many co-occurring disorders involved in obesity management, multiple mechanisms of action are likely required to improve outcomes. This frequently requires the use of multiple AOMs. The additive effectiveness of new combination medications (phentermine/topiramate, naltrexone/bupropion, and most recently tirzepatide) for many patients highlight the synergist effects and safety of combination therapy. When AOMs are used in combination, more significant improvements are achievable. This can be done using the newer combinations when accessible to the patient, or simultaneously prescribed as individual medications when newer formulations are not possible, along with combining with medications for the many obesity driven diseases, such as adding metformin when a patient also has pre-DM or PCOS [ 80 ]. If we consider the chronic disease of asthma as an example, for many children this chronic disease requires multiple medications with different mechanisms of action to appropriately manage symptoms. As outlined in the decision tree, key components of the history and physical and laboratory screening will help guide AOM utilization based on presenting symptoms and co-occurring diseases (see Fig. 13 , Fig. 14 , Fig. 15 ). To help prioritize these options, evaluation of weight-promoting medications and review of weight-losing or weight neutral alternatives should be discussed with the patient and specialist managing the medication. As obesity medicine specialists, we frequently co-manage patients with multiple conditions and mental health diagnoses where medications with weight gain side effects are utilized. Working collaboratively, via consultation or referral, with our colleagues to reduce the significant weight gain associated with these therapies is vital. Understanding the detrimental impact of worsening obesity on our pediatric population requires ongoing education of obesity as a disease. Understanding which medications have the greatest risk of weight gain, including lower risk medications as first-line options, and monitoring closely for weight gain when the patient does require the higher risk medication should be considered standard of care. As clinicians, the medications we use undoubtedly have side effects. We should discuss the risks and benefits of the side effects and the potential to improve the disease state. This requires patient-specific shared-decision making and ongoing care of our patients. Patients with obesity should be screened for obesity-related co-occurring diseases; when positive, treatment should be initiated. Many AOMs can reduce obesity and resolve many of these complications (i.e., T2DM). The expanding understanding of monogenic and polygenic obesity when early onset obesity is present provides an additional opportunity to provide patient specific interventions. In addition to these screening steps, we strive to elicit details to guide treatment options that best address the patient's phenotype [ 151 ]. Taken collectively, this process allows the clinician to fully assess disease status and formulate a comprehensive treatment strategy which may require combinations of existing AOMs. 5.4 Duration of treatment Obesity is a chronic disease; the patient and family should be counseled that lifelong treatment is likely necessary. The goal in obesity medicine management is the stabilization of the disease process and improvement in health status (including mental health), not a specific weight goal [ 12 ]. Successful changes in the treatment of obesity are seen through the lens of successful management, not cure of the disease. Patients and families should understand that cessation of a treatment modality comes with a high risk of return of increased adiposity storage and subsequent weight regain. 5.5 Off label usage in pediatrics Off-label is a common concept in pediatric care with implications for pediatric obesity treatment options. Off-label should not be equated with illegal; rather, the term off-label indicates there is not sufficient (or any) evidence from double-blinded, randomized trials to demonstrate the efficacy of a treatment for a particular indication. Therapies for pediatric conditions, including obesity treatment, are guided by clinical practice statements and guidelines along with clinical best practice. Pediatric clinicians are guided by the American Academy of Pediatrics statement on off-label medication use in children which emphasizes that “the term “off-label” refers to use [indication] of a drug that is not included in the package insert (FDA approved labeling) [and] does not imply improper, illegal, contraindicated, or investigational use” [ 152 ]. The AAP statement further states “The administration of an approved drug for a use [indication] that is not approved by the FDA is not considered research and does not warrant special consent or review if it is deemed to be in the individual patient's best interest” [ 152 ]. Over 30% of all medications prescribed to children and adolescents are “off label” and the rate of off label prescriptions decrease with age (50% at one year of age, &lt;30% by 18 years of age) [ 153 ]. The AAP statement includes specific recommendations to clinicians related to patient education and documentation when using medications (this would include AOM) that are administered for off-label indications [ 152 ]. 5.6 Treatment approach 2022 and beyond Through the dedicated work of pediatric obesity medicine clinicians, both individually and in concert with professional organizations and adult obesity medicine colleagues, progress has been made in the care and treatment of children with the disease of obesity. Even as we acknowledge the progress made in treatment and management of pediatric obesity, numerous challenges remain. Solving these challenges will require collaboration between many groups: particularly patients/families with obesity, clinicians and healthcare administrators, policy makers, payors of care, government agencies, researchers, and educators of all healthcare clinicians. Upstream challenges that cause toxic stress from poor social determinants of health should be addressed especially as they impact energy dysregulation. Table 12 lists further challenges to be addressed and potential solutions as we move forward in providing optimal obesity care for children. 5.7 Advanced treatment for pediatric obesity: summary statements The management of children with obesity is in an exciting period of transition. Many interventions used in adults are as effective, or more effective in children. Advanced therapies including anti-obesity medications, devices, and metabolic and bariatric surgery provide powerful tools to treat the disease of obesity when added to ILS. Data from increased usage of AOMs, both off label and FDA approved for obesity treatment in children, along with the increasing use of MBS show that children with obesity can be treated safely and effectively. A strong argument can be made that using age as the reason for waiting to treat a child with obesity is harmful to the child, both medically and psychologically. We need clinical trial data to guide treatment but like many other therapies used in children, we currently rely on best practice and clinical expertise to guide us. Additional therapies are in development and in trials now, but many are limited to adults. Children should be included in trials concurrently with adults. Treatment is available in the adult population for years before trials are started in the pediatric population, spawning off-label use. Advocacy for these trials and for payor coverage is imperative. Despite our challenges, we are seeing widespread recognition that the disease of obesity should be treated in children at the time of disease diagnosis and that children can benefit from advanced therapies. The complex, chronic disease of obesity can be overwhelming to both families and clinicians. We need a robust system to manage patients at the primary care and the specialty care system level. Obesity medicine specialists are uniquely prepared to handle this specialized care. We need a shift from a system of limited tertiary care pediatric obesity medicine clinics involving extensive patient contact hours to the development of multiple models of care that meet the unique needs of each community. Increased education at all levels (medical and nursing school, residency, postgraduate) is needed for a disease that affects 30% of our children. Rapid progress is possible in the next few years! In summary: 1 Pediatric obesity is a disease characterized by complex pathophysiology of the energy regulatory system, chronicity requiring lifelong management using multiple treatment modalities, and disease heterogeneity that currently has few known treatment predictors. Pediatric obesity medicine specialists are in a position to evaluate and lead patient management using the entire spectrum of therapeutic options (ILT, addressing weight promoting medications, pharmacotherapy, devices, and MBS), develop a shared treatment plan with the patient and family, and use collegial (particularly primary care) and community resources to implement the plan. 2 Frequency/Intensity of care: Few studies exist that inform the frequency or intensity of comprehensive management that achieve sustained, successful clinical outcomes for children with obesity [ 154 , 155 ]. CPS5 recommends treatment for pediatric obesity at the highest level of pediatric obesity medicine care with the greatest number of provider visits over the longest period of time possible (includes ongoing monitoring). Optimally, treatment of pediatric obesity is provided by clinician(s) in a pediatric obesity medicine clinic. If a pediatric obesity medicine clinic is not accessible, primary care providers can start by increasing their knowledge base in obesity medicine, screen for obesity and obesity driven diseases, and consult with obesity medicine specialists to determine treatment options. Referral or consultation with obesity medicine specialists will result in better outcomes with the challenge of creating more platforms to extend clinical reach [ 145 , 156 ]. 3 All clinicians providing obesity care should have training in obesity medicine practice. Certification by the American Board of Obesity Medicine ( https://www.abom.org/ ) signifies specialized knowledge and competency in the field of obesity medicine. Nurse practitioners (NP) and physician assistants (PA) who complete the Obesity Medicine Association NP/PA Certificate of Advanced Practice ( https://obesitymedicine.org/cme/np-pa-certificate-obesity-medicine/ ) demonstrate extensive knowledge of evidence-based obesity medicine treatment approaches. Ongoing CME education in obesity medicine provided by educators certified or with certificates in obesity medicine is recommended. 4 The entire toolbox of advanced obesity therapies should be available to any child with the disease of obesity and not be limited by age or obesity classification [ 128 , 154 ]. There is no current evidence that certain interventions work better after particular ages, bearing in mind that the field of pediatric obesity medicine has limited robust trial data in children. Off label prescribing of AOM for the indication of obesity is current practice due to paucity of trials in pediatric pharmacotherapy specific to obesity care and in general practice [ 152 ]. Pediatric data that does exist suggest that advanced therapeutic interventions that are successful in adults are successful in children as well with no evidence that intervention affects growth or development [ 12 , 134 , 135 ]. On the contrary, we have evidence that early intervention prevents or treats obesity driven disease(s) [ 145 ]. 5 Access to care is a health equity issue. Comprehensive obesity care for children is limited by the inadequate (often no) healthcare insurance coverage for obesity treatment, including ILT services (clinicians, registered dietitians, physical therapists, behavioral health colleagues), FDA approved AOMs, EBT, and MBS. Obesity treatment coverage is scarce for pediatric patients on governmental insurance plans [ 157 ]. Insurance products that do offer pediatric obesity treatment coverage frequently reimburse at very low rates which creates a substantial financial burden not compensated by clinic volume or reduction in no-show rates leading to unsustainability of many pediatric obesity treatment clinics [ 157 ]. Children with obesity deserve the same access to quality care that is provided to other chronic diseases [ 129 , 157 ]. To provide less is unconscionable [ 2 , 158 ]. We need to use our collective experience at all levels of society to provide comprehensive, equitable coverage for the disease of obesity in children. 6 Every child with overweight or obesity disease should receive counseling to achieve a healthy diet and active lifestyle but we recognize that this basic care is rarely successful in treating the disease of obesity. Therefore, we advocate for a higher level of treatment that uses shared decision-making to address the concerns of the child and family and those of the experienced obesity clinician. There is little evidence that staged management where the child should complete any duration of treatment using any obesity treatment modality to "qualify" for a different treatment achieves faster or better results [ 129 , 145 , 159 ]. 7 Obesity medicine specialists should be involved in the management of children with obesity. The disease of obesity is chronic and requires management of many obesity driven diseases. Management often involves longer and more frequent visits than can be accomplished in a primary care setting. We believe that working collaboratively with our primary care provider colleagues and with other subspecialists is in the best interest of the many children suffering with the disease of obesity as we do with all chronic conditions in pediatrics. This chronic care shared model has stood the test of time as evidenced by chronic care subspecialists partnering with primary care colleagues to provide comprehensive care that utilizes resources efficiently [ 160 ]. 6 Conclusions Obesity needs to be treated just like any other disease that threatens children's lives and where treatment is provided based on clinical need and not arbitrary age categories. To address pediatric obesity effectively, policymakers, health professionals and other stakeholders need to create a health system that ensures that every child has early access to high quality care for the management of overweight and obesity. Advocates for early treatment of children with obesity have published numerous papers for over 30 years and yet minimal, if any, progress in diminishing the prevalence of obesity in children has occurred [ 144 , [161] , [162] , [163] ]. Despite significant progress in evidence-based and effective obesity therapies, these modalities are not reaching affected children and remain woefully underutilized and poorly covered financially. Though there are studies and reviews that propose the nature of these barriers, the moral imperative is to eliminate the barriers and provide treatment with similar urgency as any other disease in children [ 133 , 157 ]. To do less is intolerable, unjust, and unethical. Currently, in the field of pediatric obesity medicine and as champions for children, we have the opportunity and obligation to improve the lives of children with obesity. Through state-of-art-obesity education for all clinicians [OMA], patient advocacy organizations such as the Obesity Action Coalition [OAC], and growing obesity research that expands obesity treatment tools, the outlook for improving the care of children with obesity is hopeful. While challenges remain, pediatric obesity requires our unwavering commitment to providing the best evidence-based care for all children with obesity. This Clinical Practice Statement on medication-induced weight gain and advanced therapies for the child with overweight or obesity provides clinicians with recommendations regarding their pediatric patients. The information and interventions presented may lead to improvements in the health and wellbeing of children and adolescents with overweight and obesity, especially those with metabolic, physiological, and psychological complications, and provide patients and families with the clinical tools and resources they need for a healthy future. Table 13 shows resources to support ILT and advanced therapies. Transparency [ 164 ] This manuscript was largely derived and edited from the 2020–2022 Obesity Medicine Association (OMA) Pediatric Obesity Algorithm. Beginning in 2016, the OMA created and maintained an online Pediatric “Obesity Algorithm” (i.e., educational slides and eBook) that underwent updates approximately every two years by OMA authors and was reviewed and approved annually by the OMA Board of Trustees. Authors of prior years’ versions are included in Supplement #1. This manuscript is the first published version of the applicable chapter/s of the 2020–2022 OMA Pediatric Obesity Algorithm. Group composition Over the years, the authors of the OMA Pediatric Obesity Algorithm have represented a diverse range of clinicians, allied health professionals, clinical researchers, and academicians. (Supplement #1) The authors reflect a multidisciplinary and balanced group of experts in obesity science, patient evaluation, and clinical treatment. Author contributions NTB transcribed the first draft of this CPS from the 2020–2022 OMA Pediatric Obesity Algorithm. SEC, MC, RK, VO, RC, DW, JP, AB, SK wrote specific sections based on 2020–2022 Pediatric Obesity Algorithm. SEC reviewed, edited, and approved the document for pre-peer review submission and post-peer review publication. Disclosures (declaration of potential competing interest) Potential dualities or conflicts of interest of the authors are listed in the Individual Disclosure section. Assistance of a medical writer paid by the Obesity Medicine Association is noted in the Acknowledgements section. Neither the prior OMA Pediatric Algorithms nor the publishing of this Clinical Practice Statement received outside funding. The authors of prior OMA Pediatric Obesity Algorithms never received payment for their writing, editing, and publishing work. Authors of this Clinical Practice Statement likewise received no payment for their writing, editing, and publishing work. While listed journal Editors received payment for their roles as Editors, they did not receive payment for their participation as authors. Individual Disclosures SEC declares a relationship with Novo Nordisk as a member of an Advisory Board and a relationship with Rhythm Pharmaceuticals as a member of their Gold Panel. NTB reports no disclosures pertaining to this project. MC reports no disclosures pertaining to this project. RK reports a relationship with Rhythm Pharmaceuticals including an ongoing funded study, one clinical trial, and the RGDO Speaker's Bureau. VO reports no disclosures pertaining to this project. RC reports a relationship with Rhythm Pharmaceuticals through the Speaker's Bureau. DRW reports no disclosures pertaining to this project. JP reports a relationship with Rhythm Pharmaceuticals as a member of the GOLD faculty and the Speaker's Bureau. AFB reports no disclosures pertaining to this project. SK reports an active relationship with Abbott Nutrition through the Speaker's Bureau. Evidence The content of the 10.13039/100006091 OMA Pediatric Obesity Algorithm and this manuscript is supported by citations, which are listed in the References section. Ethics review After approval by the authors, a draft manuscript was peer-reviewed and approved by the OMA Board of Trustees prior to publication. This submission did not involve human test subjects or volunteers. Conclusions and recommendations This Clinical Practice Statement is intended to be an educational tool that incorporates the current medical science and the clinical experiences of obesity medicine specialists. The intent is to better facilitate and improve the clinical care and management of patients with pre-obesity and obesity. This Clinical Practice Statement should not be interpreted as “rules” and/or directives regarding the medical care of an individual patient. The decision regarding the optimal care of the patient with overweight and obesity is best reliant upon a patient-centered approach, managed by the clinician tasked with directing an individual treatment plan that is in the best interest of the individual patient. Updating It is anticipated that sections of this Clinical Practice Statement may require future updates. The timing of such an update will depend on decisions made by Obesity Pillars Editorial team, with input from the OMA members and OMA Board of Trustees. Disclaimer and limitations Both the OMA Obesity Algorithms and this Clinical Practice Statement were developed to assist health care professionals in providing care for patients with pre-obesity and obesity based upon the best available evidence. In areas regarding inconclusive or insufficient scientific evidence, the authors used their professional judgment. This Clinical Practice Statement is intended to represent the state of obesity medicine at the time of publication. Thus, this Clinical Practice Statement is not a substitute for maintaining awareness of emerging new science. Finally, decisions by practitioners to apply the principles in this Clinical Practice Statement are best made by considering local resources, individual patient circumstances, patient agreement, and knowledge of federal, state, and local laws and guidance. Supplement #1: historic citation and acknowledgement of authorship of the Obesity Medicine Association Obesity Algorithms 2020–2022 ebook Citation: Cuda S, Censani M, Paisley J, Browne N, O'Hara V. Pediatric Obesity Algorithm eBook, presented by the Obesity Medicine Association. www.obesitymedicine.org/childhood-obesity . 2020–2022 Pediatric Algorithm slides: Cuda S, Censani M, O'Hara V, Browne N, Paisley J. Pediatric Obesity Algorithm, presented by the Obesity Medicine Association. www.obesitymedicine.org/childhood-obesity . 2020–2022. www.obesitymedicine.org/childhood-obesity . 2018–2020 Pediatric Algorithm slides: Cuda S, Censani M, Joseph M, Browne N, O'Hara V. Pediatric Obesity Algorithm, presented by the Obesity Medicine Association. www.obesitymedicine.org/childhood-obesity . 2018–2020. www.obesitymedicine.org/childhood-obesity . 2016–2017: Cuda SE, Censani M, Joseph M, Green R, Scinta W. Pediatric Obesity Algorithm. (2016-17). Available online at: www.Pediatricobesityalgorithm.org . Declaration of competing interest The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Suzanne Cuda, Medical Director Alamo City Healthy Kids &amp; Families reports a relationship with Rhythm Pharmaceuticals that includes: consulting or advisory, speaking and lecture fees, and travel reimbursement. Suzanne Cuda, Medical Director Alamo City Healthy Kids &amp; Families reports a relationship with Novo Nordisk Inc that includes: consulting or advisory and travel reimbursement. Roohi Karofa reports a relationship with Rhythm Pharmaceuticals that includes: funding grants and speaking and lecture fees. Sara Karjoo reports a relationship with 10.13039/100001316 Abbott Laboratories that includes: speaking and lecture fees and travel reimbursement. Jennifer Paisley reports a relationship with Rhythm Pharmaceuticals that includes: speaking and lecture fees and travel reimbursement. Rushika Conroy reports a relationship with Rhythm Pharmaceuticals that includes: speaking and lecture fees and travel reimbursement. References 1 Geserick M. Vogel M. Gausche R. Lipek T. Spielau U. Keller E. Acceleration of BMI in early childhood and risk of sustained obesity N Engl J Med 379 2018 1303 1312 30281992 10.1056/NEJMoa1803527 2 Smith H.J. Piotrowski J.I. Zaza S. Ethics of implementing US preventive services task force recommendations for childhood obesity Pediatrics 2021 148 34187910 10.1542/peds.2020-048009 3 Sharifi M. Goodman A.B. Chua K.P. Assessment of underuse and overuse of screening tests for Co-occurring conditions among children with obesity JAMA Netw Open 5 2022 e2222101 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.22101 PMC9284328 35834247 4 Puhl R.M. Lessard L.M. Weight stigma in youth: prevalence, consequences, and considerations for clinical practice Curr Obes Rep 9 2020 402 411 33079337 10.1007/s13679-020-00408-8 5 O'Hara V.M. Curran J.L. Browne N.T. The Co-occurrence of pediatric obesity and ADHD: an understanding of shared pathophysiology and implications for collaborative management Curr Obes Rep 9 2020 451 461 33113108 10.1007/s13679-020-00410-0 6 Cuda S.E. Kharofa R. Williams D.R. Metabolic, behavioral health, and disordered eating comorbidities associated with obesity in pediatric patients: an Obesity Medical Association (OMA) Clinical Practice Statement 2022 Obesity Pillars 3 2022 100031 10.1016/j.obpill.2022.100031 PMC10662000 37990723 7 Cuda S.E. Censani M. Kharofa R. Social consequences and genetics for the child with overweight and obesity: an obesity medicine association (OMA) clinical practice statement 2022 Obesity Pillars 3 2022 100032 10.1016/j.obpill.2022.100032 PMC10662046 37990726 8 Cuda S.E. Censani M. Assessment, differential diagnosis, and initial clinical evaluation of the pediatric patient with obesity: an Obesity Medical Association (OMA) Clinical Practice Statement 2022 Obesity Pillars 1 2022 100010 10.1016/j.obpill.2022.100010 PMC10662031 37990703 9 Browne N.T. Cuda S.E. Nutritional and activity recommendations for the child with normal weight, overweight, and obesity with consideration of food insecurity: an Obesity Medical Association (OMA) Clinical Practice Statement 2022 Obesity Pillars 2 2022 100012 10.1016/j.obpill.2022.100012 PMC10661897 37990712 10 Williams D.R. Braddock A. Houser M. Blair G. Browne N.T. Review of upstream social factors contributing to childhood obesity March 2023 Obesity Pillars Special Edition (In Press) 10.1016/j.obpill.2022.100040 PMC10662005 37990668 11 McEwen B.S. Neurobiological and systemic effects of chronic stress vol. 1 2017 Chronic Stress Thousand Oaks 10.1177/2470547017692328 PMC5573220 28856337 12 Srivastava G. Fox C.K. Kelly A.S. Jastreboff A.M. Browne A.F. Browne N.T. Clinical considerations regarding the use of obesity pharmacotherapy in adolescents with obesity Obesity 27 2019 190 204 30677262 10.1002/oby.22385 PMC6449849 13 Tondt J. Bays H.E. Concomitant medications, functional foods, and supplements: an obesity medicine association (OMA) clinical practice statement (CPS) 2022 Obesity Pillars 2 2022 100017 10.1016/j.obpill.2022.100017 PMC10661915 37990714 14 Ghusn W. Bouchard C. Frye M.A. Acosta A. Weight-centric treatment of depression and chronic pain Obesity Pillars 3 2022 100025 10.1016/j.obpill.2022.100025 PMC10661995 37990725 15 Cooper W.O. Arbogast P.G. Ding H. Hickson G.B. Fuchs D.C. Ray W.A. Trends in prescribing of antipsychotic medications for US children Ambul Pediatr 6 2006 79 83 16530143 10.1016/j.ambp.2005.11.002 16 Dayabandara M. Hanwella R. Ratnatunga S. Seneviratne S. Suraweera C. de Silva V.A. Antipsychotic-associated weight gain: management strategies and impact on treatment adherence Neuropsychiatric Dis Treat 13 2017 2231 2241 10.2147/NDT.S113099 PMC5574691 28883731 17 Chao A.M. Wadden T.A. Berkowitz R.I. Obesity in adolescents with psychiatric disorders Curr Psychiatr Rep 21 2019 3 10.1007/s11920-019-0990-7 PMC6529197 30661128 18 Bak M. Fransen A. Janssen J. van Os J. Drukker M. Almost all antipsychotics result in weight gain: a meta-analysis PLoS One 9 2014 e94112 10.1371/journal.pone.0094112 PMC3998960 24763306 19 Yoon Y. Wink L.K. Pedapati E.V. Horn P.S. Erickson C.A. Weight gain effects of second-generation antipsychotic treatment in autism spectrum disorder J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol 26 2016 822 827 27389348 10.1089/cap.2016.0049 20 Khera R. Murad M.H. Chandar A.K. Dulai P.S. Wang Z. Prokop L.J. Association of pharmacological treatments for obesity with weight loss and adverse events: a systematic review and meta-analysis JAMA 315 2016 2424 2434 27299618 10.1001/jama.2016.7602 PMC5617638 21 Holt R.I.G. Association between antipsychotic medication use and diabetes Curr Diabetes Rep 19 2019 96 10.1007/s11892-019-1220-8 PMC6718373 31478094 22 Anagnostou E. Aman M.G. Handen B.L. Sanders K.B. Shui A. Hollway J.A. Metformin for treatment of overweight induced by atypical antipsychotic medication in young people with autism spectrum disorder: a randomized clinical trial JAMA Psychiatr 73 2016 928 937 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.1232 27556593 23 Klein D.J. Cottingham E.M. Sorter M. Barton B.A. Morrison J.A. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of metformin treatment of weight gain associated with initiation of atypical antipsychotic therapy in children and adolescents Am J Psychiatr 163 2006 2072 2079 17151157 10.1176/ajp.2006.163.12.2072 24 Verrotti A. Scardapane A. Franzoni E. Manco R. Chiarelli F. Increased oxidative stress in epileptic children treated with valproic acid Epilepsy Res 78 2008 171 177 18164182 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2007.11.005 25 Biton V. Mirza W. Montouris G. Vuong A. Hammer A.E. Barrett P.S. Weight change associated with valproate and lamotrigine monotherapy in patients with epilepsy Neurology 56 2001 172 177 11160951 10.1212/wnl.56.2.172 26 Rehman T. Sachan D. Chitkara A. Serum insulin and leptin levels in children with epilepsy on valproate-associated obesity J Pediatr Neurosci 12 2017 135 137 28904569 10.4103/jpn.JPN_152_16 PMC5588636 27 Antel J. Hebebrand J. Weight-reducing side effects of the antiepileptic agents topiramate and zonisamide Handb Exp Pharmacol 2012 433 466 22249827 10.1007/978-3-642-24716-3_20 28 Li H.F. Zou Y. Xia Z.Z. Gao F. Feng J.H. Yang C.W. Effects of topiramate on weight and metabolism in children with epilepsy Acta Paediatr 98 2009 1521 1525 19508301 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2009.01349.x 29 Solmi M. Fornaro M. Ostinelli E.G. Zangani C. Croatto G. Monaco F. Safety of 80 antidepressants, antipsychotics, anti-attention-deficit/hyperactivity medications and mood stabilizers in children and adolescents with psychiatric disorders: a large scale systematic meta-review of 78 adverse effects World Psychiatr 19 2020 214 232 10.1002/wps.20765 PMC7215080 32394557 30 Duffy A. Grof P. Lithium treatment in children and adolescents Pharmacopsychiatry 51 2018 189 193 29490377 10.1055/a-0575-4179 31 Correll C.U. Weight gain and metabolic effects of mood stabilizers and antipsychotics in pediatric bipolar disorder: a systematic review and pooled analysis of short-term trials J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 46 2007 687 700 17513981 10.1097/chi.0b013e318040b25f 32 Cockerill R.G. Biggs B.K. Oesterle T.S. Croarkin P.E. Antidepressant use and body mass index change in overweight adolescents: a historical cohort study Innov Clin Neurosci 11 2014 14 21 PMC4301027 25621183 33 Jerrell J.M. McIntyre R.S. Metabolic, digestive, and reproductive adverse events associated with antimanic treatment in children and adolescents: a retrospective cohort study Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry 12 2010 10.4088/PCC.09m00891ora PMC2983461 21085553 34 Hamman R.F. Bell R.A. Dabelea D. D'Agostino R.B. Jr. Dolan L. Imperatore G. The SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study: rationale, findings, and future directions Diabetes Care 37 2014 3336 3344 25414389 10.2337/dc14-0574 PMC4237981 35 Liraglutide prescribing information for treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (VICTOZA) https://www.novo-pi.com/victoza.pdf 36 Ard J. Fitch A. Fruh S. Herman L. Weight loss and maintenance related to the mechanism of action of glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists Adv Ther 38 2021 2821 2839 33977495 10.1007/s12325-021-01710-0 PMC8189979 37 Lin C.H. Shao L. Zhang Y.M. Tu Y.J. Zhang Y. Tomlinson B. An evaluation of liraglutide including its efficacy and safety for the treatment of obesity Expet Opin Pharmacother 21 2020 275 285 10.1080/14656566.2019.1695779 31790314 38 Kelly A.S. Auerbach P. Barrientos-Perez M. Gies I. Hale P.M. Marcus C. A randomized, controlled trial of liraglutide for adolescents with obesity N Engl J Med 382 2020 2117 2128 32233338 10.1056/NEJMoa1916038 39 Russell-Jones D. Khan R. Insulin-associated weight gain in diabetes--causes, effects and coping strategies Diabetes Obes Metabol 9 2007 799 812 10.1111/j.1463-1326.2006.00686.x 17924864 40 Apovian C.M. Okemah J. O'Neil P.M. Body weight considerations in the management of type 2 diabetes Adv Ther 36 2019 44 58 30465123 10.1007/s12325-018-0824-8 PMC6318231 41 Jones K.L. Arslanian S. Peterokova V.A. Park J.S. Tomlinson M.J. Effect of metformin in pediatric patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized controlled trial Diabetes Care 25 2002 89 94 11772907 10.2337/diacare.25.1.89 42 Laffel L. Chang N. Grey M. Hale D. Higgins L. Hirst K. Metformin monotherapy in youth with recent onset type 2 diabetes: experience from the prerandomization run-in phase of the TODAY study Pediatr Diabetes 13 2012 369 375 22369102 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2011.00846.x PMC3371323 43 Group T.S. Zeitler P. Hirst K. Pyle L. Linder B. Copeland K. A clinical trial to maintain glycemic control in youth with type 2 diabetes N Engl J Med 366 2012 2247 2256 22540912 10.1056/NEJMoa1109333 PMC3478667 44 Weghuber D. Barrett T. Barrientos-Pérez M. Gies I. Hesse D. Jeppesen O.K. Kelly A.S. Mastrandrea L.D. Sørrig R. Arslanian S. STEP TEENS Investigators Once-weekly semaglutide in adolescents with obesity N Engl J Med 2022 Nov 2 10.1056/NEJMoa2208601 Epub ahead of print. PMID: 36322838 PMC9997064 36322838 45 Hershey A.D. Powers S.W. Nelson T.D. Kabbouche M.A. Winner P. Yonker M. Obesity in the pediatric headache population: a multicenter study Headache 49 2009 170 177 18783447 10.1111/j.1526-4610.2008.01232.x 46 Peterlin B.L. Rapoport A.M. Kurth T. Migraine and obesity: epidemiology, mechanisms, and implications Headache 50 2010 631 648 19845784 10.1111/j.1526-4610.2009.01554.x PMC3969571 47 Oakley C.B. Scher A.I. Recober A. Peterlin B.L. Headache and obesity in the pediatric population Curr Pain Headache Rep 18 2014 416 24695998 10.1007/s11916-014-0416-5 PMC4026326 48 Winner P. Pearlman E.M. Linder S.L. Jordan D.M. Fisher A.C. Hulihan J. Topiramate for migraine prevention in children: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial Headache 45 2005 1304 1312 16324162 10.1111/j.1526-4610.2005.00262.x 49 Deaton T.L. Mauro L.S. Topiramate for migraine prophylaxis in pediatric patients Ann Pharmacother 48 2014 638 643 24566461 10.1177/1060028014521128 50 Fariba K.A. Saadabadi A. Topiramate. StatPearls. Treasure island 2022 FL 51 Yamanaka G. Morichi S. Suzuki S. Go S. Takeshita M. Kanou K. A review on the triggers of pediatric migraine with the aim of improving headache education J Clin Med 9 2020 10.3390/jcm9113717 PMC7699367 33228144 52 Neut D. Fily A. Cuvellier J.C. Vallee L. The prevalence of triggers in paediatric migraine: a questionnaire study in 102 children and adolescents J Headache Pain 13 2012 61 65 22042255 10.1007/s10194-011-0397-2 PMC3253155 53 Brown A. Guess N. Dornhorst A. Taheri S. Frost G. Insulin-associated weight gain in obese type 2 diabetes mellitus patients: what can be done? Diabetes Obes Metabol 19 2017 1655 1668 10.1111/dom.13009 28509408 54 Berthon B.S. MacDonald-Wicks L.K. Wood L.G. A systematic review of the effect of oral glucocorticoids on energy intake, appetite, and body weight in humans Nutr Res 34 2014 179 190 24655484 10.1016/j.nutres.2013.12.006 55 Curtis J.R. Westfall A.O. Allison J. Bijlsma J.W. Freeman A. George V. Population-based assessment of adverse events associated with long-term glucocorticoid use Arthritis Rheum 55 2006 420 426 16739208 10.1002/art.21984 56 Gallo M.F. Lopez L.M. Grimes D.A. Carayon F. Schulz K.F. Helmerhorst F.M. Combination contraceptives: effects on weight Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014 CD003987 16437470 10.1002/14651858.CD003987.pub2 57 Lopez L.M. Ramesh S. Chen M. Edelman A. Otterness C. Trussell J. Progestin-only contraceptives: effects on weight Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016 CD008815 27567593 10.1002/14651858.CD008815.pub4 PMC5034734 58 Janez A. Guja C. Mitrakou A. Lalic N. Tankova T. Czupryniak L. Insulin therapy in adults with type 1 diabetes mellitus: a narrative review Diabetes Ther 11 2020 387 409 31902063 10.1007/s13300-019-00743-7 PMC6995794 59 American Diabetes Association 2. Classification and diagnosis of diabetes: standards of medical care in diabetes-2021 Diabetes Care 44 Suppl 1 2021 Jan S15 S33 10.2337/dc21-S002 Erratum in: Diabetes Care. 2021 Sep;44(9):2182. PMID: 33298413 33298413 60 Sharma A.M. Pischon T. Hardt S. Kunz I. Luft F.C. Hypothesis: beta-adrenergic receptor blockers and weight gain: a systematic analysis Hypertension 37 2001 250 254 11230280 10.1161/01.hyp.37.2.250 61 Ratliff J.C. Barber J.A. Palmese L.B. Reutenauer E.L. Tek C. Association of prescription H1 antihistamine use with obesity: results from the national health and nutrition examination survey Obesity 18 2010 2398 2400 20706200 10.1038/oby.2010.176 PMC3221329 62 Murphy H.M. Ihekoronze C. Wideman C.H. Zolpidem-induced changes in activity, metabolism, and anxiety in rats Pharmacol Biochem Behav 98 2011 81 86 21182854 10.1016/j.pbb.2010.12.012 63 Apovian C.M. Aronne L.J. Bessesen D.H. McDonnell M.E. Murad M.H. Pagotto U. Pharmacological management of obesity: an endocrine Society clinical practice guideline J Clin Endocrinol Metab 100 2015 342 362 25590212 10.1210/jc.2014-3415 64 Sherafat-Kazemzadeh R. Yanovski S.Z. Yanovski J.A. Pharmacotherapy for childhood obesity: present and future prospects Int J Obes 37 2013 1 15 10.1038/ijo.2012.144 PMC3522799 22929210 65 Coghill D.R. Caballero B. Sorooshian S. Civil R. A systematic review of the safety of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate CNS Drugs 28 2014 497 511 24788672 10.1007/s40263-014-0166-2 PMC4057639 66 Fox C.K. Marlatt K.L. Rudser K.D. Kelly A.S. Topiramate for weight reduction in adolescents with severe obesity Clin Pediatr 54 2015 19 24 10.1177/0009922814542481 PMC5958908 25027265 67 Domecq J.P. Prutsky G. Leppin A. Sonbol M.B. Altayar O. Undavalli C. Clinical review: drugs commonly associated with weight change: a systematic review and meta-analysis J Clin Endocrinol Metab 100 2015 363 370 25590213 10.1210/jc.2014-3421 PMC5393509 68 Yilmaz U. Yilmaz T.S. Dizdarer G. Akinci G. Guzel O. Tekgul H. Efficacy and tolerability of the first antiepileptic drug in children with newly diagnosed idiopathic epilepsy Seizure 23 2014 252 259 24370319 10.1016/j.seizure.2013.12.001 69 Oswald I. Adam K. Benzodiazepines cause small loss of body weight Br Med J 281 1980 1039 1040 10.1136/bmj.281.6247.1039-a PMC1714455 6107164 70 Weisler R.H. Cutler A.J. Ballenger J.C. Post R.M. Ketter T.A. The use of antiepileptic drugs in bipolar disorders: a review based on evidence from controlled trials CNS Spectr 11 2006 788 799 17008822 10.1017/s1092852900014917 71 Patel A. Chan W. Aparasu R.R. Ochoa-Perez M. Sherer J.T. Medhekar R. Effect of psychopharmacotherapy on body mass index among children and adolescents with bipolar disorders J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol 27 2017 349 358 28422528 10.1089/cap.2016.0133 72 Cates M.E. Feldman J.M. Boggs A.A. Woolley T.W. Whaley N.P. Efficacy of add-on topiramate therapy in psychiatric patients with weight gain Ann Pharmacother 42 2008 505 510 18364406 10.1345/aph.1K520 73 Leucht S. Cipriani A. Spineli L. Mavridis D. Orey D. Richter F. Comparative efficacy and tolerability of 15 antipsychotic drugs in schizophrenia: a multiple-treatments meta-analysis Lancet 382 2013 951 962 23810019 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60733-3 74 Dent R. Blackmore A. Peterson J. Habib R. Kay G.P. Gervais A. Changes in body weight and psychotropic drugs: a systematic synthesis of the literature PLoS One 7 2012 e36889 10.1371/journal.pone.0036889 PMC3376099 22719834 75 Leslie W.S. Hankey C.R. Lean M.E. Weight gain as an adverse effect of some commonly prescribed drugs: a systematic review QJM 100 2007 395 404 17566010 10.1093/qjmed/hcm044 76 Bray G.A. Ryan D.H. Medical therapy for the patient with obesity Circulation 125 2012 1695 1703 22474312 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.026567 77 Serretti A. Mandelli L. Antidepressants and body weight: a comprehensive review and meta-analysis J Clin Psychiatr 71 2010 1259 1272 10.4088/JCP.09r05346blu 21062615 78 Uguz F. Sahingoz M. Gungor B. Aksoy F. Askin R. Weight gain and associated factors in patients using newer antidepressant drugs Gen Hosp Psychiatr 37 2015 46 48 10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2014.10.011 25467076 79 Phentermine HCL/topiramate extended release prescribing information (QSYMIA) http://www.vivus.com/docs/QsymiaPI.pdf 80 Kelly A.S. Bensignor M.O. Hsia D.S. Phentermine/topiramate for the treatment of adolescent obesity NEJM Evid 1 6 2022 10.1056/EVIDoa2200014 PMC10035585 36968652 81 LOMAIRA™ (phentermine hydrochloride USP) tablets, CIV) https://www.lomaira.com/Prescribing_Information.pdf 82 Lewis K.H. Fischer H. Ard J. Barton L. Bessesen D.H. Daley M.F. Safety and effectiveness of longer-term phentermine use: clinical outcomes from an electronic health record cohort Obesity 27 2019 591 602 30900410 10.1002/oby.22430 83 Liraglutide prescribing information for treatment of obesity (SAXENDA) https://www.novo-pi.com/saxenda.pdf Accessed 84 Danne T. Biester T. Kapitzke K. Jacobsen S.H. Jacobsen L.V. Petri K.C.C. Liraglutide in an adolescent population with obesity: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 5-week trial to assess safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of liraglutide in adolescents aged 12-17 years J Pediatr 181 2017 146 153 e3 27979579 10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.10.076 85 XENICAL® (orlistat Capsules https://www.xenical.com/pdf/PI_Xenical-brand_FINAL.PDF 86 Davidson M.H. Hauptman J. DiGirolamo M. Foreyt J.P. Halsted C.H. Heber D. Weight control and risk factor reduction in obese subjects treated for 2 years with orlistat: a randomized controlled trial JAMA 281 1999 235 242 9918478 10.1001/jama.281.3.235 87 Setmelanotide injection (IMCIVREE) prescribing information https://www.rhythmtx.com/IMCIVREE/prescribing-information.pdf 88 Haws R.M. Gordon G. Han J.C. Yanovski J.A. Yuan G. Stewart M.W. The efficacy and safety of setmelanotide in individuals with Bardet-Biedl syndrome or Alstrom syndrome: phase 3 trial design Contemp Clin Trials Commun 22 2021 100780 10.1016/j.conctc.2021.100780 PMC8114053 34013094 89 Markham A. Setmelanotide: first approval Drugs 81 2021 397 403 33638809 10.1007/s40265-021-01470-9 90 Cuda S. Censani M. Progress in pediatric obesity: new and advanced therapies Curr Opin Pediatr 34 2022 407 413 35797460 10.1097/MOP.0000000000001150 91 Clement K. van den Akker E. Argente J. Bahm A. Chung W.K. Connors H. Efficacy and safety of setmelanotide, an MC4R agonist, in individuals with severe obesity due to LEPR or POMC deficiency: single-arm, open-label, multicentre, phase 3 trials Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 8 2020 960 970 33137293 10.1016/S2213-8587(20)30364-8 92 Semaglutide injection 2.4 mg (WEGOVY) prescribing information https://www.novo-pi.com/wegovy.pdf 93 Mahapatra M.K. Karuppasamy M. Sahoo B.M. Semaglutide, a glucagon like peptide-1 receptor agonist with cardiovascular benefits for management of type 2 diabetes Rev Endocr Metab Disord 23 2022 521 539 34993760 10.1007/s11154-021-09699-1 PMC8736331 94 Latini R. Staszewsky L. Semaglutide and effective weight control Lancet 397 2021 942 943 33667415 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00377-9 95 Wilding J.P.H. Batterham R.L. Calanna S. Davies M. Van Gaal L.F. Lingvay I. Once-weekly semaglutide in adults with overweight or obesity N Engl J Med 384 2021 989 1002 33567185 10.1056/NEJMoa2032183 96 Naltrexone HCL/bupropion HCL extended release prescribing information (CONTRAVE) http://general.takedapharm.com/content/file.aspx?filetypecode=CONTRAVEPI&amp;cacheRandomizer=c5f9d506-7c0a-4c03-b357-2a926ba14990 97 Apovian C.M. Aronne L. Rubino D. Still C. Wyatt H. Burns C. A randomized, phase 3 trial of naltrexone SR/bupropion SR on weight and obesity-related risk factors (COR-II) Obesity 21 2013 935 943 23408728 10.1002/oby.20309 PMC3739931 98 Apovian C.M. Naltrexone/bupropion for the treatment of obesity and obesity with Type 2 diabetes Future Cardiol 12 2016 129 138 26679384 10.2217/fca.15.79 99 Guan R. Yang Q. Yang X. Du W. Li X. Ma G. Efficacy and safety of tirzepatide in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a bayesian network meta-analysis Front Pharmacol 13 2022 998816 10.3389/fphar.2022.998816 PMC9613929 36313305 100 Jastreboff A.M. Aronne L.J. Ahmad N.N. Wharton S. Connery L. Alves B. Tirzepatide once weekly for the treatment of obesity N Engl J Med 387 2022 205 216 35658024 10.1056/NEJMoa2206038 101 Min T. Bain S.C. The role of tirzepatide, dual GIP and GLP-1 receptor agonist, in the management of type 2 diabetes: the SURPASS clinical trials Diabetes Ther 12 2021 143 157 33325008 10.1007/s13300-020-00981-0 PMC7843845 102 Corcoran C. Jacobs T.F. Metformin. StatPearls. Treasure island (FL) 2022 103 Jarskog L.F. Hamer R.M. Catellier D.J. Stewart D.D. Lavange L. Ray N. Metformin for weight loss and metabolic control in overweight outpatients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder Am J Psychiatr 170 2013 1032 1040 23846733 10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.12010127 PMC3874085 104 Yerevanian A. Soukas A.A. Metformin: mechanisms in human obesity and weight loss Curr Obes Rep 8 2019 156 164 30874963 10.1007/s13679-019-00335-3 PMC6520185 105 Correll C.U. Sikich L. Reeves G. Johnson J. Keeton C. Spanos M. Metformin add-on vs. antipsychotic switch vs. continued antipsychotic treatment plus healthy lifestyle education in overweight or obese youth with severe mental illness: results from the IMPACT trial World Psychiatr 19 2020 69 80 10.1002/wps.20714 PMC6953545 31922663 106 Tamborlane W.V. Bishai R. Geller D. Shehadeh N. Al-Abdulrazzaq D. Vazquez E.M. Once-weekly exenatide in youth with type 2 diabetes Diabetes Care 45 2022 1833 1840 35679098 10.2337/dc21-2275 PMC9346995 107 Kelly A.S. Metzig A.M. Rudser K.D. Fitch A.K. Fox C.K. Nathan B.M. Exenatide as a weight-loss therapy in extreme pediatric obesity: a randomized, controlled pilot study Obesity 20 2012 364 370 22076596 10.1038/oby.2011.337 PMC3684414 108 Bridges A. Bistas K.G. Jacobs T.F. Exenatide. StatPearls. Treasure island 2022 FL 30085523 109 Senoo Y. Kami M. Once-weekly dulaglutide for treatment of youths with type 2 diabetes N Engl J Med 387 2022 1529 1530 10.1056/NEJMc2211623 36260804 110 Pratley R.E. Aroda V.R. Lingvay I. Ludemann J. Andreassen C. Navarria A. Semaglutide versus dulaglutide once weekly in patients with type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN 7): a randomised, open-label, phase 3b trial Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 6 2018 275 286 29397376 10.1016/S2213-8587(18)30024-X 111 Bonora E. Frias J.P. Tinahones F.J. Van J. Malik R.E. Yu Z. Effect of dulaglutide 3.0 and 4.5 mg on weight in patients with type 2 diabetes: exploratory analyses of AWARD-11 Diabetes Obes Metabol 23 2021 2242 2250 10.1111/dom.14465 PMC8518850 34189841 112 Fox C.K. Kaizer A.M. Rudser K.D. Nathan B.M. Gross A.C. Sunni M. Meal replacements followed by topiramate for the treatment of adolescent severe obesity: a pilot randomized controlled trial Obesity 24 2016 2553 2561 27807925 10.1002/oby.21633 PMC5125846 113 Topiramate (Topamax(R)). Mother to baby | fact sheets. Brentwood1994. 114 Lisdexamfetamine dimesylate (VYVANSE) Prescribing Information http://pi.shirecontent.com/PI/PDFs/Vyvanse_USA_ENG.pdf 20, 2016 115 Huecker M.R. Smiley A. Saadabadi A. Bupropion. StatPearls. Treasure island 2022 FL 116 Anderson J.W. Greenway F.L. Fujioka K. Gadde K.M. McKenney J. O'Neil P.M. Bupropion SR enhances weight loss: a 48-week double-blind, placebo- controlled trial Obes Res 10 2002 633 641 12105285 10.1038/oby.2002.86 117 Williams K. Nadler E.P. The role of devices in the management of pediatric obesity Curr Obes Rep 11 2022 55 60 35737260 10.1007/s13679-022-00476-y 118 Kang H.S. DeAntonio J. Oiticica C. Lanning D. Browne A. Novel and emerging devices and operations in the treatment of obesity in children and adolescents Semin Pediatr Surg 29 2020 150881 10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2020.150881 32238282 119 Sachdev P. Reece L. Thomson M. Natarajan A. Copeland R.J. Wales J.K. Intragastric balloon as an adjunct to lifestyle programme in severely obese adolescents: impact on biomedical outcomes and skeletal health Int J Obes 42 2018 115 118 10.1038/ijo.2017.215 PMC5763248 28871150 120 Zitsman J.L. DiGiorgi M.F. Zhang A.Z. Kopchinski J.S. Sysko R. Devlin M.J. Adolescent gastric banding: a 5-year longitudinal study Obes Surg 30 2020 828 836 31820403 10.1007/s11695-019-04321-5 121 Lee P.C. Dixon J. Medical devices for the treatment of obesity Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 14 2017 553 564 28698663 10.1038/nrgastro.2017.80 122 Maisiyiti A. Chen J.D. Systematic review on gastric electrical stimulation in obesity treatment Expet Rev Med Dev 16 2019 855 861 10.1080/17434440.2019.1673728 PMC6946629 31570014 123 Ryder R.E.J. Yadagiri M. Burbridge W. Irwin S.P. Gandhi H. Bashir T. Duodenal-jejunal bypass liner for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and obesity: 3-year outcomes in the First National Health Service (NHS) EndoBarrier Service Diabet Med 39 2022 e14827 10.1111/dme.14827 PMC9313821 35285080 124 Greenway F.L. Aronne L.J. Raben A. Astrup A. Apovian C.M. Hill J.O. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of Gelesis100: a novel nonsystemic oral hydrogel for weight loss Obesity 27 2019 205 216 30421844 10.1002/oby.22347 PMC6587502 125 Ismail F.Y. Fatemi A. Johnston M.V. Cerebral plasticity: windows of opportunity in the developing brain Eur J Paediatr Neurol 21 2017 23 48 27567276 10.1016/j.ejpn.2016.07.007 126 Kumbhari V. Hill C. Sullivan S. Bariatric endoscopy: state-of-the-art Curr Opin Gastroenterol 33 2017 358 365 28682794 10.1097/MOG.0000000000000383 127 Kurian M. Kroh M. Chand B. Mikami D. Reavis K. Khaitan L. SAGES review of endoscopic and minimally invasive bariatric interventions: a review of endoscopic and non-surgical bariatric interventions Surg Endosc 32 2018 4063 4067 29845397 10.1007/s00464-018-6238-5 128 Pratt J.S.A. Browne A. Browne N.T. Bruzoni M. Cohen M. Desai A. ASMBS pediatric metabolic and bariatric surgery guidelines 2018 Surg Obes Relat Dis 14 2018 882 901 30077361 10.1016/j.soard.2018.03.019 PMC6097871 129 Cardel M.I. Atkinson M.A. Taveras E.M. Holm J.C. Kelly A.S. Obesity treatment among adolescents: a review of current evidence and future directions JAMA Pediatr 174 2020 609 617 32202626 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2020.0085 PMC7483247 130 Olbers T. Beamish A.J. Gronowitz E. Flodmark C.E. Dahlgren J. Bruze G. Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in adolescents with severe obesity (AMOS): a prospective, 5-year, Swedish nationwide study Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 5 2017 174 183 28065734 10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30424-7 PMC5359414 131 Inge T.H. Courcoulas A.P. Helmrath M.A. Five-year outcomes of gastric bypass in adolescents as compared with adults Reply. N Engl J Med. 381 2019 e17 31461610 10.1056/NEJMc1908751 132 Salimi-Jazi F. Chkhikvadze T. Shi J. Pourmehdi-Lahiji A. Moshksar A. Rafeeqi T.A. Trends in adolescent bariatric procedures: a 15-year analysis of the national inpatient survey Obes Surg 32 2022 3658 3665 36103080 10.1007/s11695-022-06265-9 133 Armstrong S.C. Bolling C.F. Michalsky M.P. Reichard K.W. Section On Obesity S.O.S. Pediatric metabolic and bariatric surgery: evidence, barriers, and best practices Pediatrics 2019 144 31656225 10.1542/peds.2019-3223 134 Alqahtani Ten-year outcomes of children and adolescents who underwent sleeve gastrectomy: weight loss, comorbidity resolution, adverse events, and growth velocity J Am Coll Surg 233 6 2021 Dec 657 664 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2021.08.678 34563670 135 de la Cruz-Munoz N. Xie L. Quiroz H.J. Kutlu O.C. Atem F. Lipshultz S.E. Long-term outcomes after adolescent bariatric surgery J Am Coll Surg 235 2022 592 602 36102560 10.1097/XCS.0000000000000325 PMC9484037 136 Stanford F.C. Alfaris N. Gomez G. Ricks E.T. Shukla A.P. Corey K.E. The utility of weight loss medications after bariatric surgery for weight regain or inadequate weight loss: a multi-center study Surg Obes Relat Dis 13 2017 491 500 27986587 10.1016/j.soard.2016.10.018 PMC6114136 137 Toth A.T. Gomez G. Shukla A.P. Pratt J.S. Cena H. Biino G. Weight loss medications in young adults after bariatric surgery for weight regain or inadequate weight loss: a multi-center study Children 5 2018 10.3390/children5090116 PMC6162731 30158481 138 Chalklin C.G. Ryan Harper E.G. Beamish A.J. Metabolic and bariatric surgery in adolescents Curr Obes Rep 10 2021 61 69 33725324 10.1007/s13679-021-00423-3 PMC8159783 139 Wagner E.H. Chronic disease management: what will it take to improve care for chronic illness? Effect Clin Pract 1 1998 2 4 10345255 140 Wagner E.H. Organizing care for patients with chronic illness revisited Milbank Q 97 2019 659 664 31424130 10.1111/1468-0009.12416 PMC6739608 141 Pape L. Ernst G. Health care transition from pediatric to adult care: an evidence-based guideline Eur J Pediatr 181 2022 1951 1958 35084548 10.1007/s00431-022-04385-z PMC9056438 142 Campbell F. Biggs K. Aldiss S.K. O'Neill P.M. Clowes M. McDonagh J. Transition of care for adolescents from paediatric services to adult health services Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4 2016 CD009794 27128768 10.1002/14651858.CD009794.pub2 PMC10461324 143 Gray W.N. Schaefer M.R. Resmini-Rawlinson A. Wagoner S.T. Barriers to transition from pediatric to adult care: a systematic review J Pediatr Psychol 43 2018 488 502 29190360 10.1093/jpepsy/jsx142 144 Herdes R.E. Tsao D.D. Pratt J.S.A. Why earlier may be better: a look at the use of metabolic and bariatric surgery in the treatment of severe childhood obesity Surg Obes Relat Dis 17 2021 2107 2110 34565685 10.1016/j.soard.2021.09.003 145 Gross A.C. Kaizer A.M. Kelly A.S. Rudser K.D. Ryder J.R. Borzutzky C.R. Long and short of it: early response predicts longer-term outcomes in pediatric weight management Obesity 27 2019 272 279 30677263 10.1002/oby.22367 PMC6352906 146 Bomberg E.M. Ryder J.R. Brundage R.C. Straka R.J. Fox C.K. Gross A.C. Precision medicine in adult and pediatric obesity: a clinical perspective Ther Adv Endocrinol Metab 10 2019 2042018819863022 10.1177/2042018819863022 PMC6661805 31384417 147 Eichen D.M. Mestre Z.L. Strong D.R. Rhee K.E. Boutelle K.N. Defining and identifying predictors of rapid response to pediatric obesity treatment Pediatr Obes 15 2020 e12621 10.1111/ijpo.12621 PMC7202991 32100412 148 Harold E. Bays, Angela fitch, sandra christensen, karli burridge, justin tondt, anti-obesity medications and investigational agents: an obesity medicine association (OMA) clinical practice statement (CPS) 2022 Obesity Pillars 2 2022 100018 10.1016/j.obpill.2022.100018 ISSN 26673681 PMC10662004 37990711 149 Danielsson P. Kowalski J. Ekblom O. Marcus C. Response of severely obese children and adolescents to behavioral treatment Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 166 2012 1103 1108 23108856 10.1001/2013.jamapediatrics.319 150 Knop C. Singer V. Uysal Y. Schaefer A. Wolters B. Reinehr T. Extremely obese children respond better than extremely obese adolescents to lifestyle interventions Pediatr Obes 10 2015 7 14 24347523 10.1111/j.2047-6310.2013.00212.x 151 Acosta A. Camilleri M. Abu Dayyeh B. Calderon G. Gonzalez D. McRae A. Selection of antiobesity medications based on phenotypes enhances weight loss: a pragmatic trial in an obesity clinic Obesity 29 2021 662 671 33759389 10.1002/oby.23120 PMC8168710 152 Frattarelli D.A. Galinkin J.L. Green T.P. Johnson T.D. Neville K.A. Paul I.M. Off-label use of drugs in children Pediatrics 133 2014 563 567 24567009 10.1542/peds.2013-4060 153 Allen H.C. Garbe M.C. Lees J. Aziz N. Chaaban H. Miller J.L. Off-label medication use in children, more common than we think: a systematic review of the literature J Oklahoma State Med Assoc 111 2018 776 783 PMC6677268 31379392 154 O'Hara V. Browne N. Fathima S. Sorondo B. Bayleran J. Johnston S. Obesity cardiometabolic comorbidity prevalence in children in a rural weight-management program Glob Pediatr Health 4 2017 2333794X17729303 10.1177/2333794X17729303 PMC5593208 28959708 155 Borzutzky C. King E. Fox C.K. Stratbucker W. Tucker J. Yee J.K. Trends in prescribing anti-obesity pharmacotherapy for paediatric weight management: data from the POWER Work Group Pediatr Obes 16 2021 e12701 10.1111/ijpo.12701 32877010 156 Gudzune K.A. Johnson V.R. Bramante C.T. Stanford F.C. Geographic availability of physicians certified by the American board of obesity medicine relative to obesity prevalence Obesity 27 2019 1958 1966 31515965 10.1002/oby.22628 PMC6868336 157 Srivastava G. Browne N. Kyle T.K. O'Hara V. Browne A. Nelson T. Caring for US children: barriers to effective treatment in children with the disease of obesity Obesity 29 2021 46 55 34494365 10.1002/oby.22987 158 Krist A.H. Davidson K.W. Silverstein M. A national call to action for a feasible equitable approach to childhood obesity Pediatrics 2021 148 34187908 10.1542/peds.2021-051052 159 Fox C.K. Gross A.C. Bomberg E.M. Ryder J.R. Oberle M.M. Bramante C.T. Severe obesity in the pediatric population: current concepts in clinical care Curr Obes Rep 8 2019 201 209 31054014 10.1007/s13679-019-00347-z PMC12337599 160 Stille C.J. Honigfeld L. Heitlinger L.A. Kuo D.Z. Werner E.J. The pediatric primary care-specialist interface: a call for action J Pediatr 187 2017 303 308 28595768 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.04.054 161 Davis K. Christoffel K.K. Obesity in preschool and school-age children. Treatment early and often may be best Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 148 1994 1257 1261 7951803 10.1001/archpedi.1994.02170120019003 162 Davis K. Christoffel K.K. Vespa H. Pierleoni M.P. Papanastassiou R. Obesity in preschool and school-age children. Early frequent treatment is best Ann N Y Acad Sci 699 1993 262 264 8267320 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1993.tb18859.x 163 Small L. Anderson D. Melnyk B.M. Prevention and early treatment of overweight and obesity in young children: a critical review and appraisal of the evidence Pediatr Nurs 33 2007 149 152 55-61, 27 17542238 164 Institute of Medicine (U.S Committee on standards for developing trustworthy clinical practice guidelines., graham R. Clinical practice guidelines we can trust 2011 National Academies Press Washington, DC 24983061 Acknowledgements Medical writing support (funded by the Obesity Medicine Association ) was provided by Savannah Logan, who helped implement author revisions while adhering to Good Publication Practice (GPP3) guidelines and International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) recommendations. Graphic assistance was provided by Alyssa Cuda, and artwork was provided by Abigail Alsdurf.