4390 plosgph PLOS Global Public Health PLOS Glob Public Health PLOS PMC10406184 10406184 10406184 37549128 10.1371/journal.pgph.0002240 Impact of intensive adherence counseling on viral load suppression and mortality among people living with HIV in Kampala, Uganda: A regression discontinuity design Izudi Jonathan Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &amp; editing 1 2 3 * Castelnuovo Barbara Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &amp; editing 1 King Rachel Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &amp; editing 4 Cattamanchi Adithya Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &amp; editing 5 6 Zakumumpa Henry Editor 7 1 Infectious Diseases Institute, College of Health Sciences, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda 2 University of California Global Health Institute (UCGHI), University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States of America 3 African Population and Health Research Center (APHRC), Nairobi, Kenya 4 Institute for Global Health Sciences, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, California, United States of America 5 Center for Tuberculosis, San Francisco General Hospital, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States of America 6 Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States of America 7 Makerere University, UGANDA The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. ✉ * E-mail: jonahzd@gmail.com 7 8 2023 3 8 e0002240 e0002240 8 8 2023 This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication. Abstract Intensive adherence counseling (IAC) is recommended for people living with HIV (PLHIV) with viral load (VL) ≥1,000 copies/ml after ≥6 months of anti-retroviral therapy (ART). We evaluated the effect of IAC on VL suppression and all-cause mortality among PLHIV on first-line ART with VL ≥1,000 copies/ml after ≥6 months of ART in Kampala, Uganda using regression discontinuity design, a quasi-experimental method for effect estimation when interventions depend on a cut-off. PLHIV just above VL ≥1,000 copies/ml cut-off who received ≥3 IAC sessions formed the intervention group while those just below the cut-off who received routine psychosocial support constituted the control group. Primary outcome was repeat VL suppression defined as VL &lt;1,000 copies/ml approximately 9–12 months following initial VL assessment. Secondary outcome was all-cause mortality. We used logistic regression for causal-effect analysis, reported as odds ratio (OR) with a 95% confidence interval (CI). We performed sensitivity analyses to assess the robustness of findings to varying bandwidths at the cut-off. We found 3,735 PLHIV were started on ART between Nov 2020 and Nov 2021 of whom 3,199 were included in the analysis (3,085 control, 114 intervention). Within an optimal bandwidth, there were 236 participants (222 control, 14 intervention) with similar demographic and clinical characteristics. Repeat VL suppression was lower in the intervention than in the control group (85.7% versus 98.6%, p = 0.021) while all-cause mortality was similar (0% versus 0.5%, p = 1.000). In multivariable analysis, the odds of repeat VL suppression were 91% lower in the intervention than control group (OR = 0.09; 95% CI, 0.01–0.66). Findings are robust to varying bandwidths around the cut-off. We concluded IAC is ineffective in suppressing VL among PLHIV on first-line ART in Kampala, Uganda. Findings suggest a need to investigate the IAC implementation fidelity for successful translation in practice and the reasons for VL persistence beyond the suppression threshold. status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Received 2023 Apr 14; Accepted 2023 Jul 13; Collection date 2023. Introduction With optimal adherence to Anti-Retroviral Therapy (ART), nearly all people living with HIV (PLHIV) achieve viral load (VL) suppression (VL &lt;1,000 copies/ml) within six months of ART initiation [ 1 ]. VL suppression reduces vulnerability to opportunistic infections, improves the quality and quantity of life of PLHIV, reduces the risk of HIV transmission during sexual intercourse, prevents mother to child transmission of HIV during labor, delivery, and breastfeeding, and it is indicative of an optimally performing HIV control program [ 2 ]. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends intensive adherence counseling (IAC) for those with unsuppressed VL (VL ≥1,000 copies/ml). IAC consists of three sessions of targeted and structured counseling and support, provided one month apart by a multidisciplinary team to help PLHIV with unsuppressed VL overcome barriers to ART adherence [ 1 ]. Existing evidence regarding the effectiveness of IAC is mixed. A systematic review and meta-analysis reported that 46.1% of PLHIV had VL suppression after three IAC sessions [ 3 ], with VL suppression being lower among children and adolescents than adults [ 3 ]. A retrospective cohort study conducted in Zimbabwe reported 1–2 or ≥3 IAC sessions are associated with a higher likelihood of VL suppression than a single IAC session [ 4 ]. In Uganda, a prospective cohort study involving PLHIV on long-term ART with unsuppressed VL found less than one in 10 had VL suppression after completing IAC [ 5 ], suggesting IAC is ineffective in reversing unsuppressed VL. In children and adolescents living with HIV in Uganda, less than a quarter suppressed their VL after three IAC sessions [ 6 ]. While studies conducted on IAC and VL suppression in Uganda and elsewhere appear to suggest that IAC has little to no effect on VL suppression, the causal effect of IAC on VL suppression is unknown. One study used a before and after design [ 7 ] while several others used a retrospective cohort design [ 4 , 6 , 8 , 9 ] to measure the effect of IAC on VL suppression, therefore, precluding an assessment of the causal effect of IAC on VL suppression. The EFF ectiveness of IN tensive A dherence C ounselling (EFFINAC) study was designed to evaluate the causal effect of IAC on VL suppression and all-cause mortality among adolescents and adults on first-line ART with unsuppressed VL after six or more months of ART in Kampala, Uganda using real-world (programmatic) data. Methods and materials Study setting and data source The EFFINAC study was conducted at six government health facilities in the Kampala metropolitan area in Uganda. All the study sites were primary healthcare units and they included Kisenyi, Kawaala, Kisugu, Kitebi, Komamboga, and Kiswa Health Centers. Kisenyi is a Health Center (HC) IV or a county-level health facility serving nearly 100,000 people and the others are HC III or parish-level health facilities and each serves approximately 20,000 people [ 10 ]. Each of the study sites has an HIV clinic that provides HIV prevention, care, treatment, and support to PLHIV according to the Uganda National HIV/AIDS Treatment Guidelines [ 1 ]. The clinics collect HIV data at each patient visit using the Uganda Ministry of Health (MoH) standardized HIV/ART card. Collected data are entered into an electronic medical record system. We retrieved, cleaned, and analyzed the data ( S1 Data ). The health facilities receive technical support and assistance in data management from the Infectious Diseases Institute (IDI). Further details about the study sites are described elsewhere [ 11 , 12 ]. Ethical issues The EFFINAC study received ethical approval from the IDI Research Ethics Committee (approval #IDI-REC-2022-18) and the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (approval #HS25553ES). Administrative clearance was obtained from the Directorate of Public Health and Environment of KCCA (approval # DPHE/KCCA/1301). Since existing medical records were retrieved and analyzed, the requirement for informed consent was waived by the IDI-REC and UNCST. Inclusivity in global research Additional information regarding the ethical, cultural, and scientific considerations specific to inclusivity in global research is included in the S1 File . Study design We used a regression discontinuity design (RDD), a quasi-experimental approach to measure the causal effect of IAC on VL suppression and all-cause mortality. RDD is appropriate when intervention assignment depends on a cut-off [ 13 – 15 ]. The provision of IAC depends on VL being ≥1,000 copies/ml so that PLHIV above the cut-off receive IAC while those below the cut-off continue with routine psychosocial support (PSS). An RDD study simulates a randomized controlled trial at the cut-off (local randomization) [ 16 ] by comparing outcomes among participants who are just above and just below the cut-off since the two groups are likely to be similar in both measured and unmeasured confounders [ 17 ]. With IAC, the probability of assignment to IAC shifts from zero to one at the cut-off, a phenomenon termed discontinuity. The conditions for an RDD include an assignment or forcing variable measured on a continuous scale, a cut-off, and outcome(s) measured for all participants regardless of the intervention [ 14 ]. In the EFFINAC study, the assignment variable was VL following six or more months of ART, the cut-off was VL ≥1,000 copies/ml, and the outcomes were VL suppression and all-cause mortality. Study population Between Dec 1, 2022, and Jan 5, 2023, we extracted data through Nov 1, 2022 from the electronic medical record system on all PLHIV who initiated ART at the six study sites between Nov 1, 2020 and Nov 30, 2021. Additional data for PLHIV receiving IAC were abstracted from the IAC register. We included PLHIV aged ≥15 years who were initiated on a first-line ART regimen at one of the six study sites between Nov 1, 2020 and Nov 30, 2021. The HIV resistance level of the participants was not known as the testing is not universally performed due to its high cost. The participants were primarily on Dolutegravir (DTG)-based regimens and followed for ≥12 months until Nov 1, 2022 to allow full data collection on IAC and repeat VL. The first-line ART regimen in Uganda consists of the possible combinations of Tenofovir (TDF) or Abacavir (ABC), Lamivudine (3TC), and Dolutegravir (DTG), Efavirenze (EFV) or Atazanavir/Ritonavir (ATV/r). We excluded PLHIV on Non-Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors (NNRTI) due to a higher level of pre-treatment resistance at 15.9% in this population per the Uganda National Antiretroviral Drug Resistance Committee study [ 1 ]. In the EFFINAC study, the intervention group included PLHIV just above the VL ≥1,000 copies/ml cut-off who received ≥3 IAC sessions. The control group consisted of PLHIV just below the VL ≥1,000 copies/ml cut-off who received routine PSS. In both groups, PLHIV with no repeat VL data and those transferred out to other health facilities were excluded. Measurements Intervention versus control groups IAC was the intervention and was used at all six study sites in accordance with the Uganda MoH HIV treatment guidelines. IAC refers to a psychosocial counselling and support intervention provided by a multidisciplinary team of health workers (clinicians, nurses, counsellors, family members, and peers among others) to PLHIV with unsuppressed VL after six or more months of ART. IAC is recommended when unsuppressed VL results from suboptimal ART adherence but not HIV drug resistance. In Uganda, HIV drug resistance testing is not routinely performed for PLHIV on a first-line ART regimen [ 6 ]. IAC aims to overcome the barriers to optimal ART adherence and usually three or more IAC sessions spaced one month apart and scheduled according to routine appointment dates are provided to PLHIV with unsuppressed VL. IAC is provided according to five A’s: 1) Assess: assessing adherence levels, progress in dealing with barriers, compliance to adherence plans, and new barriers to ART adherence; 2) Advice: advising on specific barriers to ART adherence, benefits of good ART adherence and the consequences of ART non-adherence; 3) Assist: assisting PLHIV in identifying barriers to ART adherence, prioritizing the barriers, developing possible solutions, and discussing the pros and cons of each solution; 4) Agree: agreeing on solutions to address key barriers, evaluating and documenting each solution, and developing a new ART adherence plan; and 5) Arrange: Here, the team summarizes the prioritized solutions, review the new ART adherence plan, explain the IAC schedule, emphasize appointment keeping, schedule for subsequent IAC sessions, arrange/or refill ART, and provide a return date. Expert consultations and referrals are sought to address complex issues, for example, stigma, disclosure, mental health challenges, and nutrition. All IAC sessions received are reported in the MoH IAC register to ease the tracking of the sessions per individual. After completing IAC (≥3 IAC sessions), repeat VL testing is performed and PLHIV with VL ≥1,000 copies/ml are categorized as treatment failure and are switched to a second-line ART regimen according to the HIV treatment guidelines. However, PLHIV with VL&lt;1,000 copies/ml after completing IAC are reverted to routine PSS to maintain their suppressed VL status. In the control group, health workers provide routine PSS to PLHIV with suppressed VL following six or more months of ART to help maintain VL suppression. At all six study sites, PSS is provided by individual health workers during routine HIV care at both the health facility and community levels. These health workers interact with PLHIV throughout the process of HIV care and treatment, including during health education, consultation, and ART refills. Routine PSS services are provided according to the needs of PLHIV and may include any of the following: 1) psychosocial screening and assessment for adolescents using the Home, Education/ Eating/ Employment, Activity, Drugs, Sex, and Sexuality, Suicidal ideation/mental health (HEADSS) tool at each clinical visit; 2) general and targeted health education; 3) ART adherence preparation, monitoring, and support; 4) counselling and psychotherapy; 5) mental health screening using the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ)-2 tool followed by PHQ-9 tool if the score on the former exceeded three; 6) positive health dignity and prevention; 7) family and social support; 8) care and support for survivors of gender-based violence (GBV); 9) nutritional care and support; and 10) referral and linkage to specialized health care, socio-economic and legal support, including the fight against discrimination, and spiritual support. In the event of unsuppressed VL after PSS, IAC is provided as recommended. Baseline covariates The health facility-related covariates included health facility characteristics, namely the name of the study site and level of care (HC III versus IV). Individual-level sociodemographic covariates included age measured in absolute years and categorized as 15–24, 25–34, 35–44, 45–54, and 55 and more, and sex measured as female or male. Individual-level clinical covariates included the point of entry into HIV care, baseline WHO clinical stage (I, II, III, and IV), weight in kilograms, nutritional status measured based on mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) categorized as well-nourished, moderate acute malnutrition and severe acute malnutrition, CD4 count (less or ≥500 cells/ul), tuberculosis or TB status (no signs and symptoms of TB, currently on TB treatment, diagnosed with TB, TB treatment completed and presumed with TB). We classified ART regimens as DTG-based (TDF/3TC/DTG, TDF-FTC-NVP, TDF-FTC-EFV, TDF-3TC-NVP, and TDF-3TC-EFV), ABC-based (ABC/3TC/DTG and ABC-3TC-LPV/r), AZT-based ART regimen (AZT/3TC/DTG and AZT-3TC-NVP), and other first-line ART regimens. Study outcomes The primary outcome was repeat VL suppression defined as VL &lt;1,000 copies/ml measured after completion of IAC in the intervention group and after PSS in the control group. The secondary outcome was all-cause mortality, measured as death from any cause during the study period. Both outcomes were measured on a binary scale (yes or no). Statistical issues The analysis was performed in R version 4.2.1 using the “rdd ” and “ rdrobust ” packages and Stata version 15.0. We hypothesized there will be no difference in repeat VL suppression between the intervention and control groups. Two variables, MUAC and baseline weight, had missing observations which were imputed using the multivariate imputations via the chained equations (MICE). We conducted exploratory data analysis and graphical exploration of the validity of RDD. Here, we summarized numerical data using the mean and standard deviation when normally distributed, or the median and interquartile range (IQR) when skewed. We computed frequencies and percentages for categorical data. We graphed the probability of treatment assignment, the outcomes, and the baseline covariates against the forcing variable to assess the type of RDD, the magnitude of effect, and covariate distribution, respectively at the cut-off. The distribution of observations at the cut-off was assessed by plotting the density of the forcing variable and testing using the McCrary test [ 18 ]. We tested differences in the distribution of baseline categorical variables such as sex across the intervention and control groups using the Chi-square test when the cell count was large (≥5) otherwise the Fisher’s exact test was used for smaller cell counts (&lt;5). The Student’s t-test was used to test mean differences in numerical data such as age across the groups when the data were normally distributed else the Wilcoxon-rank sum test was used when the data were skewed. We declared the dataset as an RDD object with a constant seed number to ensure reproducibility. We determined the optimal bandwidth (the lower and upper bound) at the VL ≥1,000 copies/ml cut-off using the Imbens-Kalyanaraman method [ 14 , 19 ] and extracted and saved the dataset for further analysis. To estimate the effect of IAC on the primary and secondary outcomes, we fitted a multivariable generalized linear model with a logit-link and binomial distribution with the outcomes as a function of IAC with and without adjusted for the baseline covariates and with and without restriction of the observations to the optimal bandwidth. We reported the results as odds ratio (OR) and the 95% confidence interval (CI). Sensitivity analysis and reporting of findings We checked the robustness of the estimates using varying bandwidths, either increasing or decreasing at the VL ≥1,000 copies/ml cut-off. We adhered to the elements of Improving the Reporting Quality of Nonrandomized Evaluations of Behavioral and Public Health Interventions (The TREND) statement [ 20 ] in reporting the study results. Results Summary of study profile Overall, we retrieved records on 3,735 PLHIV and excluded 536 (14.4%) for reasons: 512 participants had transferred to other health facilities while 24 were below 15 years of age ( Fig 1 ). General characteristics of the participants Among the 3,199 participants, mean age was 31.2 years (standard deviation, 9.5), 1,031 (32.3%) were from Kisenyi HC IV, 2,216 (69.3%) were female, and 1,941 (60.7%) were enrolled into HIV care through the Outpatient Department ( Table 1 ). At ART initiation, 3,066 (95.8%) were in WHO clinical stage I, 3,025 (94.6%) were started on TDF/3TC/DTG (overall, 3,089 or 96.6% on TDF-based ART regimen) and 3,165 (98.9%) were well-nourished. The majority of participants (2,587 or 80.9%) had CD4 counts ≥500 cells/ul at ART initiation while 3102 (97.0%) had no signs or symptoms of TB. Participants in the intervention and control groups differed with respect to age category (p = 0.001), baseline WHO clinical stage (p = 0.016), baseline weight (p&lt;0.001), and baseline ART regimen (p&lt;0.001). Covariate balance between the intervention and control groups before and after applying the optimal bandwidth The median VL for the control group was 1 copy/ml (IQR 1–49) and the VL ranged from 0–999 copies/ml. In the intervention group, the median VL was 13,321 copies/ml (IQR 3,890–44,200) and the range was 1030–2,300,000 copies/ml. We estimated an optimal bandwidth of 1824.301 (approximately 912.15 below and 912.15 above) at the VL ≥1,000 copies/ml cut-off using the Imbens-Kalyanaraman approach. Within this optimal bandwidth, there were 222 participants in the control group (representing 6.9% of people with VL&lt;1000 copies/ml), and 14 participants in the intervention group (representing 12.3% of people with VL ≥1,000 copies/ml). The control and intervention group participants within the optimal bandwidth were similar on observed covariates, with p&gt;0.05 ( Table 2 ). Primary and secondary outcome findings before and after optimal bandwidth When assessing the entire study population ( Table 3 ), repeat VL was suppressed in 3,016 of 3,085 (97.8%) participants in the control group and 93 of 114 (81.6%, p&lt;0.001) participants in the intervention group. Deaths were similar between the control and intervention groups (1.6% versus 0.9%, respectively, p = 0.85). After applying the optimal bandwidth, repeat VL was suppressed in 219 of 222 (97.9%) participants in the control group and 12 of 114 (85.7%, p&lt;0.001) participants in the intervention group. Just one death was observed overall in the control group (p = 1.0). Effect of IAC on viral load suppression and all-cause mortality Analysis of the entire dataset (n = 3,199) showed a lower likelihood of VL suppression in the intervention group compared to the control group in both the unadjusted (OR 0.10; 95% CI 0.06–0.17) and adjusted (aOR 0.12; 95% CI, 0.07–0.21) analyses. There was no difference in mortality when comparing the intervention vs. control groups in both the unadjusted (OR 0.56; 95% CI 0.08–4.09) and adjusted (aOR 0.39; 95% CI 0.05–2.96) analyses. Similarly, within the optimal bandwidth, the proportion with repeat VL suppression was lower in the IAC group than in the control group (85.7% vs. 98.6%, OR = 0.09, 95% CI, 0.01–0.66) and all-cause mortality did not vary ( Table 4 ). Sensitivity analysis results at varying bandwidths The effect of IAC on VL suppression remained the same (OR = 0.09; 95% CI, 0.01–0.66) when the optimal bandwidth was widened by 25, 50, 75, and 85 both below and above the VL ≥1,000 copies/ml cut-off, and when it was narrowed by 50. Discussion Focusing on PLHIV with an initial VL around the 1000 copies/mL cut-off, repeat VL suppression was lower in those who were above the cut-off and received IAC than in those who were below the cut-off and received routine PSS. These findings suggest IAC is not effective in achieving VL suppression. Our evidence contributes to informing the implementation of IAC to support PLHIV in Uganda and similar settings in sub-Saharan Africa in adhering to ART. Our study is the first to rigorously evaluate the effect of IAC on VL suppression and all-cause mortality in Uganda and sub-Saharan Africa. Consequently, evidence from a similar study design to compare our results is lacking. Nonetheless, previous observational studies conducted in Uganda [ 5 , 8 ] and Ethiopia [ 21 , 22 ] all report unsuppressed VL after IAC completion, consistent with our results. Our finding of a lower likelihood of repeat VL suppression despite IAC might be explained by several social and biologically plausible reasons and we attempt to present a few of them. First, IAC is appropriate when unsuppressed VL results from poor ART adherence. Our finding appears to suggest indiscriminate recommendation and application of IAC for all PLHIV with unsuppressed VL regardless of ART adherence status. IAC is ineffective if VL suppression is due to drug resistance but not suboptimal ART adherence. For instance, among PLHIV on a second-line ART regimen with a high prevalence of resistance in eastern Uganda, IAC failed to reverse unsuppressed VL [ 5 ]. Second, a high pre-IAC VL influences VL suppression. Previous epidemiological studies [ 21 , 22 ] report a higher likelihood of treatment failure (unsuppressed VL after IAC) among PLHIV with a higher pre-IAC VL ≥1,000 copies/ml compared to those with a lower pre-IAC VL &lt;1,000 copies/ml. Third, insufficiencies in IAC implementation are prevalent within health facilities. For example, the failure to form a multidisciplinary team to provide IAC has been reported in a previous study in Uganda [ 7 ], leading to inadequate ART adherence support or counseling to PLHIV with unsuppressed VL. Another important consideration is the possibility of suboptimal ART adherence during IAC for reasons such as stigma and undisclosed HIV serostatus, for example. In Ethiopia [ 22 ], ART adherence remained poor among PLHIV on IAC and subsequently led to a treatment failure. Similar to our setting, evidence indicates that most HIV control programs lack systems to monitor ART adherence during IAC except VL monitoring after IAC completion [ 23 ]. Therefore, continuous monitoring of ART adherence during IAC might be needed to detect progress in halting VL increase. Four, IAC as a single intervention might be inadequate to achieve VL suppression. Additional interventions might be needed to complement the role of IAC in addressing the barriers to ART adherence. One study reports that a lack of support from family members or relatives compromises ART adherence leading to unsuppressed VL despite IAC [ 7 ]. Lastly, a lack of food or nutritional support to PLHIV on IAC has been reported to compromise ART adherence [ 7 ]. The success of IAC might therefore entail nutritional or other structural support to enhance ART adherence. Implications of findings Our findings have ramifications for current practice, policy, and future research. Overall, our findings appear to suggest a need to review and reconsider IAC implementation in supporting ART adherence and achieving VL suppression in Uganda and similar settings. The fidelity of implementation of IAC across HIV control programs to determine the extent to which it is delivered as intended as well as the dose and intensity need rigorous evaluation in future research. Studies further need to examine adherence to the requirements of IAC among PLHIV, including rigorously assessing the reasons for unsuppressed VL despite IAC completion. On the policy front, IAC is largely a health education intervention and is expected to achieve behavioral change for better health outcomes. However, behavior change is a gradual process so health education without a healthy public policy to tackle structural and environmental barriers to ART adherence such as stigma, drug and substance use, and undisclosed HIV serostatus among others would not lead to the realization of the intended outcomes rather than blaming the person for failure to achieve VL suppression [ 24 ]. Study strengths and limitations Our study is the first RDD to determine the causal effect of IAC on VL suppression and all-cause mortality in Uganda and sub-Saharan Africa. Our findings remained robust to changing bandwidths at the cut-off and our study has a strong external validity since we analyzed real-world data. The analysis with and without an optimal bandwidth showed a similar effect of IAC on VL suppression confirming the little benefit to IAC after addressing concerns about selection bias. Limitations of the study included unmeasured confounders due to the use of observational data. We mitigated this limitation by restricting the analysis to PLHIV just below and just above the cutoff where both measured and unmeasured confounders are comparable. Our sample size within the optimal bandwidth is relatively small so studies with a large sample size would be needed to provide additional evidence. By default, our estimate represents the local average treatment effect due to the restrictive nature of the analysis. Lastly, the lack of qualitative data to contextualize the findings is another limitation to consider. Conclusions and recommendations Our study found IAC is not effective in achieving VL suppression among PLHIV on first-line ART in Kampala, Uganda. Our findings suggest a need to investigate the fidelity of IAC implementation and the reasons for VL persistence beyond the suppression threshold. Supporting information S1 Data Dataset. (DTA) Click here for additional data file. S1 File Inclusivity in global research. (DOCX) Click here for additional data file. Acknowledgments We are greatly indebted to the IDI-REC for providing a sound ethical review and approval of the study protocol. We thank the Directorate of Public Health and Management of the Kampala Capital City Authority for their kind administrative support. The health facility leaders of the respective study sites, the HMIS focal persons, and Philip Kalyesubula are much appreciated. Data Availability All relevant data are within the manuscript and its Supporting Information files. Funding Statement This project was supported by the Fogarty International Center of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under Award Number D43TW009343 and the University of California Global Health Institute (UCGHI) to JI. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH or UCGHI. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) HIV clinics are supported by funding from the Government of Uganda (GR-G-0902) and the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief through the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (co-operative agreement NU2GGH002022). References 1. Republic of Uganda. Consolidated guidelines for the prevention and treatment of HIV and AIDS in Uganda. 2020. 2. Wakooko P, Gavamukulya Y, Wandabwa JN. Viral load Suppression and Associated Factors among HIV Patients on Antiretroviral Treatment in Bulambuli District, Eastern Uganda: A Retrospective Cohort Study. Infectious diseases. 2020;13:1178633720970632. Epub 2020/11/24. doi: 10.1177/1178633720970632 ; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC7656881. 3. Ford N, Orrell C, Shubber Z, Apollo T, Vojnov L. HIV viral resuppression following an elevated viral load: a systematic review and meta‐analysis. Journal of the International AIDS Society. 2019;22(11):e25415. doi: 10.1002/jia2.25415 4. Bvochora T, Satyanarayana S, Takarinda KC, Bara H, Chonzi P, Komtenza B, et al. Enhanced adherence counselling and viral load suppression in HIV seropositive patients with an initial high viral load in Harare, Zimbabwe: operational issues. PLoS One. 2019;14(2):e0211326. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0211326 5. Birungi J, Cui Z, Okoboi S, Kapaata A, Munderi P, Mukajjanga C, et al. Lack of effectiveness of adherence counselling in reversing virological failure among patients on long-term antiretroviral therapy in rural Uganda. HIV Med. 2020;21(1):21–9. Epub 2019/08/23. doi: 10.1111/hiv.12790 ; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC6916407. 6. Nasuuna E, Kigozi J, Babirye L, Muganzi A, Sewankambo NK, Nakanjako D. Low HIV viral suppression rates following the intensive adherence counseling (IAC) program for children and adolescents with viral failure in public health facilities in Uganda. BMC Public Health. 2018;18(1):1048. Epub 2018/08/24. doi: 10.1186/s12889-018-5964-x ; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC6103875. 7. Lukyamuzi Z, Etajak S, Katairo T, Mukunya D, Tetui M, Ssenyonjo A, et al. Effect and Implementation Experience of Intensive Adherence Counseling in A Public HIV Care Center in Uganda: A Mixed-methods Study. BMC infectious diseases. 2021;(21):1168. 8. Kikaire B, Ssemanda M, Asiimwe A, Nakanwagi M, Seruwagi G, Lawoko S, et al. HIV Viral suppression Viral Load suppression following Intensive Adherence counseling among People living on treatment at Military-Managed Health Facilities in Uganda. International Journal of Infectious Diseases. 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2021.08.057 9. Ndikabona G, Alege JB, Kirirabwa NS, Kimuli D. Unsuppressed viral load after intensive adherence counselling in rural eastern Uganda; a case of Kamuli district, Uganda. BMC Public Health. 2021;21(1):1–13. 10. Republic of Uganda. Health sector strategic and investment plan: 2010/11-2014/15. Kampala, Uganda: Ministry of Health, 2010. 11. Izudi J, Sheira LA, Bajunirwe F, McCoy SI, Cattamanchi A. Effect of 6-month vs. 8-month regimen on retreatment success for pulmonary TB. The international journal of tuberculosis and lung disease: the official journal of the International Union against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease. 2022;26(12):1188–90. Epub 2022/12/01. doi: 10.5588/ijtld.22.0357 ; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC9728952. 12. Izudi J, Kiragga AN, Kalyesubula P, Okoboi S, Castelnuovo B. Effect of the COVID-19 pandemic restrictions on outcomes of HIV care among adults in Uganda. Medicine. 2022;101(36):e30282. Epub 2022/09/11. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000030282 . 13. Basta NE, Halloran ME. Evaluating the Effectiveness of Vaccines Using a Regression Discontinuity Design. American journal of epidemiology. 2019;188(6):987–90. Epub 2019/04/13. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwz043 ; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC6580688. 14. Moscoe E, Bor J, Bärnighausen T. Regression discontinuity designs are underutilized in medicine, epidemiology, and public health: a review of current and best practice. J Clin Epidemiol. 2015;68(2):122–33. Epub 2015/01/13. doi: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2014.06.021 . 15. Igelström E, Craig P, Lewsey J, Lynch J, Pearce A, Katikireddi SV. Causal inference and effect estimation using observational data. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2022;76(11):960–6. 16. Hagemeier A, Samel C, Hellmich M. The regression discontinuity design: Methods and implementation with a worked example in health services research. Zeitschrift fur Evidenz, Fortbildung und Qualitat im Gesundheitswesen. 2022;172:71–7. Epub 2022/06/20. doi: 10.1016/j.zefq.2022.04.014 . 17. Cattaneo MD, Idrobo N, Titiunik R. A practical introduction to regression discontinuity designs. Cambridge Elements: Quantitative and Computational Methods for Social Science-Cambridge University Press I. 2017. 18. Thoemmes F, Liao W, Jin Z. The analysis of the regression-discontinuity design in R. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics. 2017;42(3):341–60. 19. Imbens G, Kalyanaraman K. Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression Discontinuity Estimator. The Review of Economic Studies. 2011;79(3):933–59. doi: 10.1093/restud/rdr043 20. Des Jarlais DC, Lyles C, Crepaz N. Improving the reporting quality of nonrandomized evaluations of behavioral and public health interventions: the TREND statement. American journal of public health. 2004;94(3):361–6. Epub 2004/03/05. doi: 10.2105/ajph.94.3.361 ; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC1448256. 21. Diress G, Dagne S, Alemnew B, Adane S, Addisu A. Viral load suppression after enhanced adherence counseling and its predictors among high viral load HIV seropositive people in North Wollo zone public hospitals, northeast Ethiopia, 2019: retrospective cohort study. AIDS Research and Treatment. 2020;2020. doi: 10.1155/2020/8909232 22. Bisetegn G, Arefaynie M, Mohammed A, Fentaw Z, Muche A, Dewau R, et al. Predictors of Virological Failure after Adherence-Enhancement Counseling among First-Line Adults Living with HIV/AIDS in Kombolcha Town, Northeast Ethiopia. HIV/AIDS (Auckland, NZ). 2021;13:91–7. Epub 2021/02/04. doi: 10.2147/HIV.S290531 ; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC7847365. 23. Pius A, Josephine NN, Erick S, Winifred A, Rita M, Silverjoseph O, et al. Influence of intensified adherence counselling on viral load suppression of people receiving antiretroviral therapy at a health centre IV in southwestern Uganda: a qualitative study. AIDS Research and Therapy. 2021;18(1):1–7. 24. Oxman AD, Fretheim A, Lewin S, Flottorp S, Glenton C, Helleve A, et al. Health communication in and out of public health emergencies: to persuade or to inform? Health research policy and systems. 2022;20(1):28. Epub 2022/03/07. doi: 10.1186/s12961-022-00828-z ; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC8897761. PLOS Global Public Health PLOS Glob Public Health 10.1371/journal.pgph.0002240.r001 Decision Letter 0 Zakumumpa Henry Academic Editor © 2023 Henry Zakumumpa This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. 22 May 2023 PGPH-D-23-00651 Impact of intensive adherence counseling on viral load suppression and mortality among people living with HIV in Kampala, Uganda: a regression discontinuity design PLOS Global Public Health Dear Dr. Izudi, Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Global Public Health. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. Please submit your revised manuscript by Jun 21 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at globalpubhealth@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pgph/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file. Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript: A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'. An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter. We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript. Kind regards, Henry Zakumumpa, PhD Academic Editor PLOS Global Public Health Journal Requirements: 1. Please include a complete copy of PLOS’ questionnaire on inclusivity in global research in your revised manuscript. Our policy for research in this area aims to improve transparency in the reporting of research performed outside of researchers’ own country or community. The policy applies to researchers who have travelled to a different country to conduct research, research with Indigenous populations or their lands, and research on cultural artefacts. The questionnaire can also be requested at the journal’s discretion for any other submissions, even if these conditions are not met. Please find more information on the policy and a link to download a blank copy of the questionnaire here: https://journals.plos.org/globalpublichealth/s/best-practices-in-research-reporting . Please upload a completed version of your questionnaire as Supporting Information when you resubmit your manuscript. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice. Additional Editor Comments (if provided): [Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.] Reviewers' comments: Reviewer's Responses to Questions Comments to the Author 1. Does this manuscript meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria ? Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions? The manuscript must describe methodologically and ethically rigorous research with conclusions that are appropriately drawn based on the data presented. Reviewer #1: Yes Reviewer #2: Yes ********** 2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? Reviewer #1: Yes Reviewer #2: Yes ********** 3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)? The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception. The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified. Reviewer #1: Yes Reviewer #2: No ********** 4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English? PLOS Global Public Health does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here. Reviewer #1: Yes Reviewer #2: Yes ********** 5. Review Comments to the Author Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters) Reviewer #1: Overall, this is a well-written paper, therefore, my review outcomes are suggestions some of which may not be adopted should the authors see it fit. Abstract: Overall, the abstract provides a clear and concise summary of the study. Here are some specific comments for improvement: • The abstract does not provide enough context for the problem being studied. It would be helpful to provide some background information on the issue of HIV and ART adherence, as well as the prevalence of VL ≥1,000 copies/ml in the study population. • The abstract could benefit from a clearer description of the study design and methods. Specifically, it would be helpful to explain the regression discontinuity design in layman's terms and why it was appropriate for this study. • The results are clearly presented, but it would be helpful to provide some explanation for why the odds of repeat VL suppression were lower in the intervention group. Were there any potential reasons for this finding that were discussed in the study? Additionally, it would be helpful to mention the effect size of the intervention (i.e., the actual difference in VL suppression rates between the control and intervention groups). • The abstract ends with some useful recommendations for future research, but it would be helpful to provide some more context for why investigating the fidelity of IAC implementation and reasons for VL persistence are important. Background: The background provides a clear overview of the issue of viral load suppression in people living with HIV (PLHIV) and the use of intensive adherence counseling (IAC) to improve adherence to ART. It summarizes existing evidence on the effectiveness of IAC, highlighting mixed results from previous studies. The authors note the lack of causal evidence on the effect of IAC on viral load suppression, which the EFFINAC study aims to address. Overall, the background provides relevant and concise information to contextualize the study and the research question. However, some additional information on the importance of viral load suppression and the impact of unsuppressed viral loads on PLHIV's health outcomes could further strengthen the background. Study design: The study design presented, regression discontinuity design (RDD), appears appropriate for evaluating the causal effect of IAC on VL suppression and all-cause mortality. The use of RDD is justified since intervention assignment depends on a cut-off, with IAC being provided to PLHIV with unsuppressed VL (VL ≥1,000 copies/ml), while those with suppressed VL receive routine psychosocial support (PSS). RDD is suitable when there is a discontinuity in the probability of treatment assignment at a certain threshold, and participants just above and below this threshold are comparable. The study appears to meet the RDD conditions, with VL serving as the assignment variable, the cut-off being VL ≥1,000 copies/ml, and outcomes being measured for all participants regardless of intervention. Study population and other sections through measurements: Overall, the description of the study population and measurements is comprehensive and clear Study limitation: Could this be a potential limitation of the study design; that it assumes that individuals just above and below the cut-off are similar in both measured and unmeasured confounders, which may not always be the case. Additionally, the study design cannot account for potential selection bias, where individuals with different characteristics are more likely to receive IAC based on other factors not accounted for in the RDD. Therefore, it is important to interpret the findings of the study with caution and consider these potential limitations in the interpretation of the results. Discussion: Overall, this discussion provides a well-organized and informative critique of the effectiveness of IAC in achieving VL suppression among PLHIV in Uganda and similar settings in sub-Saharan Africa. The discussion cites relevant studies and provides plausible explanations for the lower likelihood of repeat VL suppression despite IAC. Additionally, the implications of the findings for practice, policy, and future research are well-articulated. However, there are a few areas where the discussion could be improved. Firstly, the discussion could benefit from a more detailed explanation of what IAC is and how it works to support ART adherence. This would help readers who are not familiar with the intervention to better understand the findings and implications of the study. Secondly, the discussion could have been more specific in identifying the limitations of the study, such as the small sample size, the lack of randomization, and the potential for confounding variables. By acknowledging these limitations, the authors could have enhanced the credibility and transparency of their study. Finally, the discussion could have provided more concrete recommendations for how IAC implementation could be improved. While the authors suggest that the fidelity, dose, and intensity of IAC implementation need rigorous evaluation in future research, they do not provide specific suggestions for how these improvements could be made. Providing more specific recommendations could help guide policy and practice in a more tangible way. Overall, while the discussion provides a thorough and insightful critique of the study's findings, there are opportunities for improvement in terms of providing more detailed explanations, acknowledging limitations, and offering specific recommendations for future research and practice. Reviewer #2: I did not find any statement about availability of data. Otherwise the manuscript highlights an important concern in HIV treatment and care. It is well written and all analyses are well done. What is not clear is how the participants in the control group that had unsuppressed viral load at the end of the study were handled. The inclusion criteria is also silent about the duration on ART for the participants included in the study. My major concern is how receiving IAC was measured to conclude that all participants in the intervention arm received at least 3 sessions of IAC, yet this being a retrospective data analysis using routinely collected data. I would expect some level of missingness both in IAC and viral load results. Thank you ********** 6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article ( what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files. Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public. For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy . Reviewer #1: No Reviewer #2: Yes: Bernard Kikaire ********** [NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.] While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. PLOS Global Public Health PLOS Glob Public Health 10.1371/journal.pgph.0002240.r002 Author response to Decision Letter 0 7 8 2023 3 8 e0002240 e0002240 Collection date 2023. 27 May 2023 Attachment Submitted filename: Responses to Reviewer comments.docx Click here for additional data file. PLOS Global Public Health PLOS Glob Public Health 10.1371/journal.pgph.0002240.r003 Decision Letter 1 Zakumumpa Henry Academic Editor © 2023 Henry Zakumumpa This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. 6 Jun 2023 PGPH-D-23-00651R1 Impact of intensive adherence counseling on viral load suppression and mortality among people living with HIV in Kampala, Uganda: a regression discontinuity design PLOS Global Public Health Dear Dr. Izudi, Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Global Public Health. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 06 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at globalpubhealth@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pgph/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file. Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript: A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'. An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter. We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript. Kind regards, Henry Zakumumpa, PhD Academic Editor PLOS Global Public Health Journal Requirements: 1. Please include a complete copy of PLOS’ questionnaire on inclusivity in global research in your revised manuscript. Our policy for research in this area aims to improve transparency in the reporting of research performed outside of researchers’ own country or community. The policy applies to researchers who have travelled to a different country to conduct research, research with Indigenous populations or their lands, and research on cultural artefacts. The questionnaire can also be requested at the journal’s discretion for any other submissions, even if these conditions are not met. Please find more information on the policy and a link to download a blank copy of the questionnaire here: https://journals.plos.org/globalpublichealth/s/best-practices-in-research-reporting . Please upload a completed version of your questionnaire as Supporting Information when you resubmit your manuscript. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice. Additional Editor Comments (if provided): We are delighted to share with you reports from our reviewers. Please pay attention to suggestions for improving your discussion section. [Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.] Reviewers' comments: [NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.] While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. PLOS Global Public Health PLOS Glob Public Health 10.1371/journal.pgph.0002240.r004 Author response to Decision Letter 1 7 8 2023 3 8 e0002240 e0002240 Collection date 2023. 6 Jun 2023 Attachment Submitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx Click here for additional data file. PLOS Global Public Health PLOS Glob Public Health 10.1371/journal.pgph.0002240.r005 Decision Letter 2 Zakumumpa Henry Academic Editor © 2023 Henry Zakumumpa This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. 14 Jul 2023 Impact of intensive adherence counseling on viral load suppression and mortality among people living with HIV in Kampala, Uganda: a regression discontinuity design PGPH-D-23-00651R2 Dear Jonathan Izudi, We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Impact of intensive adherence counseling on viral load suppression and mortality among people living with HIV in Kampala, Uganda: a regression discontinuity design' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Global Public Health. Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests. Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated. IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact globalpubhealth@plos.org . Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Global Public Health. Best regards, Henry Zakumumpa, PhD Academic Editor PLOS Global Public Health *********************************************************** Thank you for addressing the comments from our reviewers. Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference): Reviewer's Responses to Questions Comments to the Author 1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation. Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed ********** 2. Does this manuscript meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria ? Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions? The manuscript must describe methodologically and ethically rigorous research with conclusions that are appropriately drawn based on the data presented. Reviewer #1: Yes Reviewer #2: Yes ********** 3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? Reviewer #1: Yes Reviewer #2: Yes ********** 4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)? The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception. The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified. Reviewer #1: Yes Reviewer #2: Yes ********** 5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English? PLOS Global Public Health does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here. Reviewer #1: Yes Reviewer #2: Yes ********** 6. Review Comments to the Author Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters) Reviewer #1: Thank you Izudi and Colleagues for this great piece of writing. I hope it will be a critical resource for IAC programming. Reviewer #2: The manuscript is now clear and authors have addressed all the review comments adequately. ********** 7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article ( what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files. Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public. For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy . Reviewer #1: Yes: Kimuli Derrick Reviewer #2: Yes: Bernard Kikaire ********** Associated Data Supplementary Materials S1 Data Dataset. (DTA) Click here for additional data file. S1 File Inclusivity in global research. (DOCX) Click here for additional data file. Attachment Submitted filename: Responses to Reviewer comments.docx Click here for additional data file. Attachment Submitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx Click here for additional data file. Data Availability Statement All relevant data are within the manuscript and its Supporting Information files.