3383 ssmph SSM - Population Health SSM Popul Health Elsevier PMC10492159 10492159 10492159 37691976 10.1016/j.ssmph.2023.101434 The impact of retirement on body mass index in China: An empirical study based on regression discontinuity design Yuan Bin a Liu Wei a Cui Yuhu b ∗ a College of Management, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China b Research Team of High-Quality Development of Resource Environment and Marine Economy, Shandong University, Weihai, China ∗ Corresponding author. Research Team of High-Quality Development of Resource Environment and Marine Economy, Shandong University, Weihai, 264209, China. cui19982020@163.com 17 5 2023 23 101434 101434 10 9 2023 © 2023 The Authors This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). Abstract An aging population is an important trend of social development, and it will be China's basic national condition for a long time. However, the pressure on domestic pension payments and economic operations will increase daily. The delayed retirement policy is gradually implemented as a critical initiative to improve capital and labor force allocation. The impact of retirement on residents' Body Mass Index (BMI) and weight has become a focus issue. This paper investigates the mechanism of the impact of retirement on residents' BMI using microdata from the China Family Panel Studies (CFPS) 2018, combined with a fuzzy regression discontinuity design to measure the potential health impact of China's current retirement policy on residents. The study finds that: (1) Retirement has a significant negative effect on BMI for women, with retirement leading to a significantly increased risk of deviation from normal BMI levels and significantly increasing the weight of retired women. However, retirement does not have a significant effect on men. (2) Retirement policies affect residents' BMI to different degrees depending on their family size, with the negative effect on women being more pronounced in smaller family sizes. (3) Female residents who retire to help their children with intergenerational care are more likely to maintain normal BMI levels, significantly positively affecting their potential health. (4) Retirement negatively affects BMI through channels such as significantly reducing exercise frequency among female residents. The study demonstrates that retirement policy impacts the BMI and weight of female residents, so the formulation and implementation of delayed retirement policy should be flexible, and family factors such as family sizes and intergenerational care should be considered appropriately. Keywords: Retirement, Body mass index, Regression discontinuity, Family size, Caring for grandchildren Highlights • The deviation of the Body Mass Index of residents is first defined. • Reflect the potential health trend and disease risk of individual residents. • Further reveals the impact of retirement on residents of different family sizes and those caring for grandchildren or not. • Discuss the potential mechanisms between retirement and BMI. status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Received 2023 Feb 25; Revised 2023 Apr 18; Accepted 2023 May 15; Collection date 2023 Sep. 1. Introduction The results of the seventh national census show that the aging of China's population has deepened further. In 2020, China's population aged 60 and above reached 264.02 million, accounting for 18.70% of China's total population. Among them, the population aged 65 and above is 190.64 million, accounting for 13.50% of the total population ( National Bureau of Statistics, 2021 ). China's age structure has been changing rapidly due to increasing life expectancy, the baby boomers of the 1940s–1950s, and the “one-child policy” implemented in 1979–2016 to limit excessive population growth, with older people. In particularly, growing faster than any other age group ( Guo et al., 2023 ; Tu et al., 2021 ). By 2030, China may become the most aged country ( Li et al., 2009 ). To improve the demographic structure of China, China began to implement the “three-child policy” and related supporting measures in 2021. Both the release of the seventh national census data and the liberalization of the three-child policy are focused on the critical issue of “population aging”. The development of population aging cannot be separated from thinking about health. Obesity is a major health problem in China, where the overall obesity ratio is less than 5% but more than 20% in some cities ( Feng et al., 2020 ). At the same time, as an independent chronic disease and one of the important causative factors of many other chronic diseases, it is of great significance for the construction of a healthy China to raise the prevention and treatment of obesity to the level of national strategy and give attention to it. As a result, the abnormal or excessive increase of fat volume and fat cells in the body, obesity is usually measured by BMI (Body Mass Index) or waist circumference, and so on. BMI and body weight are the key variables in measuring potential human health. China sees people's health as an important symbol of national prosperity. It is China's belief that the country's economic development should hinge on people's health and that the people's sense of gain, happiness and security are inseparable from their good health. In the context of implementing the Healthy China strategy, can people's health and delayed retirement policies be coordinated to stimulate the vitality of talent in our society jointly? What is the impact of our current retirement policy on the level of national physical fitness? Is there any heterogeneity in the population groups with different family sizes and whether they have intergenerational care? Numerous questions need to be considered in the context of the trend of the era of delayed retirement policy. This paper is organized as follows, Part II discusses the policy background and literature review of this study, Part III describes the research design and methodology, Part IV analyzes the empirical results, and Part V presents the conclusions and policy recommendations of this paper and gives explanations for the limitations and prospects of this paper. 2. Policy background and literature review 2.1. Policy background China's current retirement policy, which has been in place since 1978, mandates retirement ages in the formal sector, including the government, public sector, state-owned enterprises, and special environment. However, mandatory retirement has not been mandated in the informal sector ( Li et al., 2016 ). Among them, the mandatory retirement age is set at 50 for female workers, 55 for female cadres, and 60 for male cadre workers; early retirement and post-retirement re-employment occur, but the vast majority of China's urban labor force retires under this policy ( Liu &amp; Xu, 2023 ). In China, going through the retirement procedure means leaving the original job, and only a few highly skilled people can get retirement re-employment benefits in their original units. Some policy disadvantages have gradually emerged during the years of practice and development. First, the current working-age population in China is decreasing in the context of the low fertility rate, and the structural changes experienced by the Chinese economy pose a challenge to its further growth ( Cai, 2023 ; Zheng, 2021 ). The age of the current retirement policy is set and implemented based on the level of social development and per capita life expectancy in the early years of the country's existence. In 1949, China's per capita life expectancy was less than 50 years, and over the past 70 years, the life expectancy of China's population has steadily increased, approaching 80 years in 2022. The mandatory retirement policy requires those employees who have reached the mandatory age for retirement but still have some productivity and creativity to leave their jobs, which may not yet maximize personal value for the employees and is a waste of talent for the companies. Second, if the retirement policy is continued, China's pension and medical insurance system will become a relatively large expense item in the overall social security system. The central pillar of China's pension system is the pay-as-you-go (PAYG) system, and a declining labor force will be accompanied by declining pension contributions and socioeconomic inequality, leading to a sharp decline in China's pension income and political pressure for reform ( Hu et al., 2023 ; Cai &amp; Cheng, 2015 ), while pensions are only ground zero for addressing China's development and aging challenges ( Jackson &amp; Howe, 2006 ). The adjustment of the “one-child” to “three-child” policy, in which the Chinese government considers the macro-demographic structure and ignores the difficulties and necessity of childcare ( Gao &amp; Li, 2021 ), will not change the trend of increasing pension deficits in the long run and will require an extension of the pension contribution period or raise the retirement age to make the pension system sustainable ( Hu et al., 2023 ). In addition, retirement has increased healthcare utilization in China, and the market for chronic disease management has expanded, with patients over 60 years of age accounting for up to 60% of the population, an increase that can be attributed to deteriorating health status ( Zhang et al., 2018 ). The health status of the Chinese population is relatively poor by international standards, deteriorating dramatically with age, and in the coming years, most older people will suffer from age-related diseases ( Giri et al., 2016 ; Smith et al., 2014 ). Companies with relatively large numbers of retirees are under tremendous pressure to pay for employee health insurance, placing a severe financial burden on the Chinese health system ( Liu et al., 2002 ). Finally, factors such as the significantly lower retirement age in China compared to OECD and EU countries, urban residents retiring earlier than workers, rural residents continuing to work into their senior years, regular pensions, and differences in economic resources explain some extent the urban-rural gap in retirement rates ( Giles et al., 2023 ). 2.2. Literature review Exploring the causal relationship between retirement policies and residents' BMI can help improve national retirement policies and the social security system, thus weaving a solid social security network and underwriting elderly services. Obesity is a major health problem in China. BMI is the world's most recognized classification for assessing the degree of obesity in humans, and BMI and body weight are key variables for measuring the potential health of humans ( Feng et al., 2020 ). Studies show that as BMI exceeds the “normal” range, the risk of chronic disease is higher ( Doll et al., 2000 ; Popkin et al., 2006 ). The relationship between weight and health is also widely recognized, with overweight having a significant impact on health problems such as heart disease, type II diabetes, and hypertension, but underweight can also be hazardous to health, and few studies have included underweight individuals in their examination of health status in retirement ( Bray, 2003 ; Gilmore, 1999 ). However, in earlier studies, most of the literature has focused on analyzing the causal relationship between retirement and health or using BMI as a health variable to examine individual health. However, BMI as a health indicator is still somewhat controversial. Our study does not directly analyze the causal relationship between retirement and health but rather discusses the effect of retirement on BMI and weight, thereby discussing the impact of retirement on potential human health risks. Most domestic and international scholars have conducted rich and systematic studies on the impact of retirement policies on the population's health status in terms of health outcomes and health behaviors. To begin with, there is no doubt that the health of older adults depreciates with age ( Grossman, 1972 ), but the impact of short-term retirement shocks on the health of older adults has been controversial. Domestic and international scholars have mainly focused on the psychological or physiological aspects of the population's health, but the impact effect has not been conclusively established. On the one hand, existing studies suggest that retirement has a significant positive impact on self-reported health and reduces outpatient care utilization ( Eibich, 2015 ; Gorry et al., 2018 ) and that men's retirement has a positive effect on their own and their wife's mental health ( Picchio &amp; Ours, 2020 ; Zang, 2020 ). On the other hand, some scholars have argued that retirement has a significant negative effect on health, that full retirement leads to a 4–6% increase in disease and a 6–9% decline in mental health, in addition to greater negative health effects in the case of mandatory or involuntary retirement, and that later retirement may mitigate or delay poor health in older adults ( Dave et al., 2008 ; Filomena &amp; Picchio, 2022 ). At the same time, it has been suggested that health improvement after retirement is a matter of perspective, depending on whether medical or functional health models are used and the weight given to objective assessments versus self-reports about changes in health ( Ekerdt et al., 1983 ). Then, studies on retirement on the health behavior of the population are currently analyzed in the national and international literature from the perspective of behaviors such as diet, activity, and tobacco and alcohol consumption. In terms of research on retirement on dietary behavior, the results suggest that retired households reduce their dietary consumption but do not change their dietary intake and that households with lower pre-retirement income seem to be more severely affected ( Dong &amp; Yang, 2017 ; Allais, Leroy, &amp; Mink, 2020 ), and that the phenomenon is also more pronounced among involuntarily-retired households ( Barrett &amp; Brzozowski, 2012 ). In terms of research on retirement on activity behavior, it has been shown that increased leisure time after retirement facilitates healthier habits ( Insler, 2014 ), while retirement leads to an increase in individual activity and social contact time, which positively affects individual physiological health. However, the benefits of exercise take time to emerge ( Coe &amp; Zamarro, 2015 ), and all these results. There are gender differences in these results ( Binh Tran &amp; Zikos, 2019 ; Grøtting &amp; Lillebø, 2020 ). Also, in terms of research on retirement on other personal behaviors, such as smoking and alcohol, it has been suggested that retirement will not change men's smoking habits and physical activity. In contrast, retirement will change men's drinking habits, increase their leisure time, increase their depression levels, and lead to a decrease in mental health ( Li, 2017 ), whereas more educated individuals have a more significant protective effect on health ( Allel, León, Staudinger, &amp; Calvo, 2021 ). Furthermore, family size and intergenerational care are also closely related to the physical health of senior citizens. It has been suggested that intergenerational care gives senior citizens a new role and is more helpful in combating depressive states of mind through interaction with the next generation, making them more alive and therefore beneficial to the physical health of senior citizens and helps prevent depression and loneliness in senior citizens ( Tsai, Motamed, &amp; Rougemont, 2013 ; Barrett &amp; Turner, 2005 ). However, some scholars have suggested that intergenerational caregiving takes away from senior citizens' own time and may pose more serious physical and mental health risks, but most of the existing literature focuses on the physical and mental health of children. So the physical and mental health of senior citizens, as the primary providers of intergenerational care, needs to be studied in more detail ( Xu &amp; Zhang, 2022 ). A review of the above literature reveals: First, that the results of current studies of retirement on the physical health of senior citizens are widely divergent and still do not form a consistent conclusion, and the type of empirical method used is crucial, in addition to differences in the timing of studies and data. Some scholars use least squares (OLS) regressions, but it has serious endogeneity problems. Health status itself is an essential variable in determining whether to retire ( Anderson &amp; Burkhauser, 1985 ; McGarry, 2004 ; Mustafa et al., 2023 ), so there is bias from reverse causality. In addition to health variables, there are also unobservable variables such as individual health basis and risk preferences that jointly drive retirement and health and thus pose the problem of omitted variable error. Over the years, much literature has attempted to address the endogeneity problem using panel data. However, panel data can only deal with the endogeneity problem posed by those unobservable variables that do not vary over time while still failing to address the endogeneity problem for those that vary over time but are correlated with explanatory variables or residual terms. Therefore, this is not a satisfactory solution. Some scholars have indicated that using instrumental variables can well solve the endogeneity problem ( Frölich, 2008 ; Zhang et al., 2018 ). Second, although Body Mass Index (BMI) as a health indicator remains controversial, using waist circumference, waist-hip ratio, or body fat percentage may be a more satisfactory approach. However, these indicators are difficult to obtain, and a scientific and easily accessible standard has not yet been developed to define and measure health indicators at home and abroad. Compared with these indicators, BMI and weight are more accessible and accepted by the public, and there is indeed a causal relationship between them and the risk of diseases. Therefore, this paper assesses the effect of retirement on the potential health risk of the population by discussing the effect of retirement on BMI and body weight, including both underweight and overweight people. Third, in the domestic literature, most articles on the effects of retirement on health are based on groups such as gender and educational attainment. At the same time, family size and intergenerational care, which significantly impact senior citizens, lack more detailed studies. Therefore, this paper analyzes the effects of retirement on the BMI of senior citizens from the perspective of family size and intergenerational care heterogeneity to fill the gaps in the current research field. Compared with previous studies, initially, this paper innovatively constructs the deviation of BMI. That is the absolute value of the difference between the actual BMI level and the normal BMI level of the respondents. And the deviation of BMI and weight of the residents are used as the dependent variables to discuss the potential health effects of retirement. Furthermore, this paper considers the further aging of China's population and the recent era of “family size miniaturization”. It divides China's family structure by the number of family members. Additionally, the paper also considers factors such as whether residents help their children with intergenerational care, further reveals the extent of the impact of retirement on the BMI level of residents from different family backgrounds, and explains the reasons for the differences. Finally, the mechanism between retirement and BMI is initially explored in terms of four aspects: exercise frequency, sleep duration, smoking, and alcohol consumption frequency. The research results help the government to optimize further and improve the retirement and social security policies and effectively integrate the policy design with the construction of a health culture to better cope with the impact of aging and comprehensively promote the construction of a healthy China. 3. Research design and methods 3.1. Theoretical framework The regression discontinuity design (RDD) is an evaluation design that was first introduced in 1960 ( Thistlethwaite &amp; Campbell, 1960 ). The RDD can effectively analyze the causal relationship between variables by using the constraint control conditions in reality and can also effectively solve the estimation bias caused by reverse causality, so it is widely used in the evaluation of policy effects ( Cook, 2008 ; Lee &amp; Lemieux, 2010 ; Van der Klaauw, 2008 ). Regarding RDD use, the two-stage least squares (2SLS) parameter estimation method is commonly used in most domestic and international literature. In discussing how retirement affects tobacco and alcohol consumption expenditure, 2SLS (referred to as IV-RD), Probit local polynomial RD regression (referred to as RD-LATE), and nonparametric (kernel estimation) RD estimation methods have been used. All three methods demonstrate that retirement significantly reduces older adults' tobacco and alcohol consumption expenditure ( Zou et al., 2018 ). Further studies find that the policy effects obtained from the IV-RD estimation, RD-LATE, and nonparametric RD method estimates are consistent ( Hank &amp; Korbmacher, 2013 ; Hahn et al., 2001 ; Lee &amp; Lemieux, 2010 ). RDD can be divided into two types, and one is sharp regression discontinuity (SRD). At the breakpoint x = c, the probability of the individual receiving the experiment to be processed jumps from 0 to 1. The other is fuzzy regression discontinuity (FRD), that is, at the breakpoint x = c , the probability of the individual receiving the experiment to be processed jumps from a to b, and the probability between a and b is between (0–1), that is, 0 &lt; a &lt; b &lt; 1 ( Imbens &amp; Lemieux, 2008 ). In the study of this paper, the statutory retirement age c differs for men and women depending on their gender. For males, the mandatory retirement age is c = 60 years old. For females, it is c = 50 or 55 years old, because the retirement age is closely related to the occupation an individual is engaged in, and the number of female workers group is much larger than the female cadres group. The mandatory retirement age for female workers is 50 years old, so let c = 50, assuming that there is no occurrence of early retirement or delayed retirement behavior of Chinese residents due to other factors, when the grouping variable x i ≥ c , that is the actual age of residents is greater than or equal to their mandatory age for retirement, the treatment variable D i = 1 and all residents retire; when x i &lt; c , the treatment variable D i = 0, and all residents have not yet retired, as shown in Eq. (1) : (1) D i = { 1 , x i ≥ c 0 , x i &lt; c However, it can be seen from China's retirement policy that after residents reach the mandatory age for retirement, not all of them fulfill retirement procedures and stop working following the policy provisions, and some residents still delay retirement. Similarly, some residents apply for early retirement due to personal health reasons or other factors. That is, due to reverse causality, retirement may affect the potential health, and the health level of people may affect the retirement decision and thus may be subject to estimation bias ( Kuhn, 2018 ). This indicates that whether residents retire or not does not entirely depend on whether the individual age reaches the mandatory age for retirement stipulated by the retirement policy. The probability of retirement has a discontinuous jump on the legal age line instead of jumping from 0 to 1, which can be considered the change caused by the retirement policy. Because whether the processing variable D i retires or not is not entirely determined by the age of the grouping variable, the probability of retirement is discontinuous around the mandatory age for retirement. Such characteristics are consistent with the idea of setting up FRD. Similarly, to provide credible estimates of the causal impact of retirement on potential health, recent studies have addressed the endogeneity issue through different methodological strategies, mainly using the instrumental variables approach or RDD ( Filomena &amp; Picchio, 2022 ). H i is assumed to be the outcome variable to study the extent of the effect of retirement on the BMI of Chinese residents, and the observed value not affected by retirement policy is noted as H i (0), and the observed value affected by retirement policy is noted as H i (1). Since the difference between H i (0) and H i (1) cannot be obtained straightforwardly, and there is individual variability in the impact of the policy on BMI. So it is not possible to infer the impact of the policy on the whole group from the impact of individual i on the policy. Therefore, when studying the effect of retirement policy on BMI, the effect of using FRD is a local average treatment effect (LATE). That is, people slightly younger than the retirement age can be compared with people just above that age, avoiding the effect of the retirement age limit on the study population. FRD is an effective approach for short-term effects estimation, so it cannot estimate the average impact of results that may evolve slowly over time. It can only identify the short-term effects of retirement on the explanatory variables ( Hallberg et al., 2015 ). However, FRD can effectively avoid the endogeneity problems arising from parameter estimation and reduce bias. Therefore, this paper uses FRD to analyze the impact of retirement on the BMI of Chinese residents and uses 2SLS for parameter estimation to assess the effect of policy implementation, which can effectively reduce the bias of estimation ( Cook, 2008 ; Lee &amp; Lemieux, 2010 ; Van der Klaauw, 2008 ). 3.2. Model construction Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 reflect the relative changes in the retirement ratio of Chinese residents with age. The horizontal axis indicates the difference between the actual age of the respondent and the mandatory age for retirement, and x = 0 represents the statutory retirement age: 60 years old for males and 50 years old for females. The vertical axis represents the retirement ratio. As shown in the figure, quadratic polynomial fitting to the number of the breakpoint years that the actual age of the respondent is from the retirement age straightforwardly reveals how the retirement ratio varies with age for both male and female residents, and there is an obvious breakpoint at the statutory retirement age of Chinese residents. A significant jump occurs at age 60 for the male group, with a retirement ratio of nearly 40%. There is also a significant jump in the female group, with a retirement ratio of nearly 20% at age 50 and 40% at age 55. The two breakpoints provide the basis for studying retirement's effect on residents' potential health status. If the retirement policy has not been implemented, the retirement ratio will have increased smoothly with age. However, due to the implementation of the retirement policy, there is a clear breakpoint in the retirement ratio around the mandatory age for retirement. Some residents are still working after reaching the mandatory age for retirement and have yet to retire. So, there is a discontinuity in the change of the retirement ratio due to the mandatory age for retirement, which suggests that the discrepancy in the retirement ratio is on account of the exogenous institutional factors of the retirement policy. FRD is to identify the relationship between retirement and BMI by using the influence of retirement policy on the proportion of retired residents. Fuzzy regression discontinuity (FRD) is estimated as a two-stage least squares regression model (2SLS) that uses the exogenous retirement system as an instrumental variable to identify the effect of retirement on the population's health status. FRD estimation can be achieved by 2SLS, which is equivalent to IV estimation, and the two are equivalent ( Cook, 2008 ; Hahn et al., 2001 ). 2SLS is an effective estimation method to address endogeneity ( Liu et al., 2019 ; Terza et al., 2008 ). The basic idea of 2SLS is to select instrumental variables and correlate them with endogenous variables. OLS estimation using the original variable “retirement” will likely lead to biased estimates, which can be avoided using an exogenous variable ( Gorry et al., 2018 ). Individual retirement is highly correlated with age. Since age is not ambiguous and is highly exogenous, using an age-related instrumental variable can accurately estimate the retirement effect. Therefore, we use a two-stage least squares method, the first stage finds the instrumental variables of retirement, and the second stage substitutes the instrumental variables into the model regression to avoid the endogeneity problem. The two-stage least squares method analyzes the unobservable variable interactions with no restrictions on the distribution of the variables. In the practical application of 2SLS, the first stage of applying OLS to the approximate equations aims to generate an instrumental variable. This method is consistent for the case where the endogenous variables are discrete. The direct application of 2SLS also yields consistent estimates, meaning that the endogenous variables are discrete and can be estimated in the first stage using OLS ( Angrist &amp; Krueger, 2001 ). The age bandwidth of the female sample group studied in this paper is 40–60, and the male sample group is 50–70, their sample ages are mainly concentrated around the retirement age. The sample population can be divided into two groups based on the set instrumental variables and the mandatory age for retirement, with those whose actual age is before the mandatory age for retirement as the control group and those after the mandatory age for retirement as the experimental group. Exogenous shocks from the retirement system are used to estimate the effect of retirement on BMI deviation values and body weight. The following fuzzy regression discontinuity (FRD) design of the effect of retirement on resident BMI deviation values and body weight is conducted through two equations of 2SLS: Effects of the stage-1 of retirement age on retirement behavior: (2) R i = α 0 + α 1 I i + α 2 Year + α 3 Year 2 + μ i Effects of the stage-2 of retirement behavior on residents’ devBMI and weight: (3) H i = β 0 + β 1 R ˆ 1 + β 2 Year + β 3 Year 2 + Z i + ν i Eq. (2) is the stage-1 relationship between retirement age and retirement, and Eq. (3) is the stage-2 relationship between retirement and resident BMI deviation value ( devBMI ) and weight. R i denotes the independent variable, whether the individual i retired. H i denotes the dependent variable : consisting of resident BMI deviation and weight. I i is an instrumental variable that indicates whether individual i is older than the mandatory age for retirement. If it is older than the mandatory age for retirement, I i = 1, and if it is lower, I i = 0. For women, the mandatory age for retirement is 50 or 55 years old, and since the retirement age is closely related to the occupation an individual is engaged in. The group of female workers is much larger than that of female cadres, and the retirement group at 50 has a larger proportion. Individual retirement is highly correlated with age, and age is not ambiguous and is strongly exogenous, and the retirement effect can be accurately estimated using age-related instrumental variables. Year denotes the difference between the actual age of the respondent and the mandatory age for retirement, and μ i and v i are the error terms. R ˆ i represents the predicted value of the first stage, β 1 denotes the estimated effect of retirement on devBMI and weight. Z i is a set of control variables, including the surveyed group's marital status, education level, family size, and exercise status. 3.3. Research data 3.3.1. Data source Based on the data from China Family Panel Studies (CFPS) in 2018, this paper uses a regression discontinuity design to study the impact of retirement on BMI. The CFPS includes microdata on older people aged 45 and above their families in China. In 2018, 32,669 people were tracked in the CFPS to study the aging problem in China, which is representative to some extent and can meet the research needs of sociology, economics, and other disciplines. The research population in this paper is a group of residents whose work units have a retirement system, and in the data screening process, some scholars exclude the sample of rural households and keep only the sample group of non-farm households ( Guo et al., 2020 ; Liu et al., 2017 ). This approach has some limitations. Since residents with rural household registration may also work in cities and have a retirement system, this paper does not take non-agricultural household registration as the criterion to judge whether they have joined the retirement system. This paper will retain samples with rural household registration, and those working in the primary industry, namely agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, and fishery production, will be excluded. According to China's retirement policy, the retirement age for women is generally 50 or 55 years old, among which the retirement age for female cadres working in party and government organs, mass organizations, enterprises, and institutions is 55 years old, and the retirement age for female workers is 50 years old. Based on China's social reality, the number of female workers is much larger than female cadres, and the retirement age for men is generally 60 years old. This study divides the age bandwidth of the samples and screens out the female sample group of 40–60 years old and the male sample group of 50–70 years old. In this study, values of BMI that are clearly abnormal are excluded by comparative screening, and the vacant values of BMI are supplemented by using the height and weight of the test subjects. The sample values of non-Chinese household registration are also excluded, and those with rural household registration are retained. Among the work type variables, the sample values of those whose work industry is the primary industry, engaged in agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, and fishery production, are excluded. At the same time, for some variables with vacant values, the interpolation method is used to fill in. The total sample that finally meet the requirements is 6096, of which 2937 are male, and 3159 are female. In filling in the vacant values using the interpolation method, if they are numerical, they are filled in according to the average values taken for that attribute in all samples. If the null value is non-numeric, the vacant values is filled with the attribute value that occurs most frequently in all samples according to the statistical principle of plurality. Add missing values to the maximum extent possible based on information from existing data. 3.3.2. Variables definitions BMI is calculated by the ratio of weight to height squared, BMI = weight (kg)/height (m) 2 , which can measure the overweight or obese state of the whole body. BMI is also the world's accepted grading method to assess the degree of obesity in the human body. The Chinese Nutrition Society defines obesity or overweight by its value range. According to The Chinese Dietary Guidelines (2007), the obesity standard suitable for Chinese adults is that when BMI&lt;18.5, the human body is in a lightweight state; at 18.5≤BMI&lt;24, in a healthy weight state; at 24≤BMI&lt;28, in an overweight state; at BMI≥28, the human body is in an obese state. Dependent Variables: We use the individual BMI deviation and weight as the dependent variables to analyze the impact of retirement on the potential health of the population. In particularly, the deviation value of individual BMI is calculated as follows: (4) d e v B M I = | B M I p e r − B M I s t a | B M I p e r indicates the individual BMI level of the respondent. B M I s t a indicates the published BMI critical value level. devBMI indicates the deviation of individual BMI, the absolute value of the difference between the respondents' BMI level and the normal BMI level, when the respondents’ BMI&lt;18.5, devBMI = |BMI-18.5|; When 18.5≤BMI&lt;24, devBMI = 0; When BMI≥24, devBMI = |BMI-24|. The greater the deviation of BMI from the normal level, the greater the risk of coronary heart disease, type 2 diabetes, breast cancer, hypertension, and other diseases. Independent Variable: The respondents' subjective responses to the question “Are you retired?” are used as the basis for setting the independent variable. Define “retired = 1” and “not retired = 0”. Control Variables: Marital status, education level, type of household, and exercise status of the surveyed group are used as control variables to exclude the influence of factors other than retirement on resident BMI. 3.4. Descriptive statistics As shown in Table 1 , the sample is grouped by gender. Table 1 gives descriptive statistics of the primary variables. Family size is defined as the number of people in a household. 1–2 people, 3–5 people, and &gt;5 people are small, medium, and large families, respectively. The mean age of the male sample is 58.507 years, with a retirement ratio of 32.6%. The mean age of the female sample is 49.493 years, and the retirement ratio is 39.1%. Also, the last two columns reveal significant differences in “BMI, devBMI, weight, retirement ratio, age, family size, and intergenerational care or not” variables between males and females. And the overall devBMI , BMI, and weight are greater for men than women. It is further found that the overall significance level of devBMI is &lt; 0.05 in different sample groups of family size or intergenerational care or not, and it can be concluded that there are significant differences in the effects of devBMI in different sample groups of family size or intergenerational care or not. There are also significant differences in the age and retirement variables for intergenerational care, which is more consistent with the reality of Chinese society. 4. Research results and analysis 4.1. Base-case regression analysis As shown in Table 2 , the stage-1 relationship between retirement age and retirement is reflected in the parameter estimates of the first stage of 2SLS, where F-value&gt;10 indicates that “whether actual age is larger than the mandatory age for retirement” as an instrumental variable is significantly related to the endogenous explanatory variable “retirement”. They have a significant correlation and the instrumental variable is valid and not a weak instrumental variable. We also do some robustness tests. Firstly, using a sample of women aged 40–60 years and a sample group of men aged 50–70 years. The sample age bandwidth is then shortened and replaced with a female sample aged 44–56 years and a male sample aged 54–66 years to estimate the above model, refining the previous study. As shown in Table 3 , the results of the effect of retirement on the devBMI and weight are given by grouping the sample by gender. The estimated results show that retirement significantly increases the devBMI and weight of women, with a 2.426 units upward fluctuation in devBMI . This indicates that retirement caused more adverse shocks to women, making them more likely to deviate from normal BMI. However, retirement does not significantly affect men's devBMI and weight. 4.2. Heterogeneity analysis of different groups The sample is grouped according to “family size” and “intergenerational caregiving or not” to identify whether the effects of retirement on BMI and body weight differed significantly between the different groups. In the context of China's aging population, the number of Chinese households is increasing rapidly, family size is decreasing, and family structure is being simplified. The proportions of one-couple households and two-generation standard nuclear families show significant declines, respectively. There are more and more single-person households, but large families still maintain a large proportion ( Hu &amp; Peng, 2015 ). Based on the above social context, households with 1–2 members are defined as “small family”, households with 3–5 members are defined as “medium family”, and households with more than 5 members are defined as “large family”. Two dummy variables, Z1 and Z2 , are introduced, Z1 for “medium family or not” and Z2 for “large family or not”. The small family is used as a control group for medium and large families. “ retirement × family size ” is defined as the interaction term used to assess the heterogeneity of the effects of different family sizes on the BMI and body weight of residents. The results are shown in Table 4 , after introducing the interaction term, retirement still significantly increased the devBMI and weight of female residents at 5%. The estimated coefficients of the interaction terms “retired or not” and “large, medium household size” are both significantly negative at 5%. Meanwhile, the estimated coefficients of “family size” are significantly positive, indicating that the effects on BMI and weight of female residents are different across family sizes. This indicates that retirement has a more significant negative impact on the female in small families and less on females in medium and large families. However, retirement has little impact on male residents. China still maintains a household ecology with a long-standing co-existence of immediate and nuclear families ( Zhang &amp; Xie, 2022 ). With the adjustment of the “three-child” policy, family size will gradually change, and the average family size is expected to increase. To a certain extent, this will avoid the negative impact of “small family” on retired residents, leading women to maintain the same intensity of daily activities as before retirement and maintain a healthy lifestyle. From the perspective of intergenerational exchange theory, there is a “give-and-take” within the family type of intergenerational exchange relationship. In other words, adult children provide financial support and security for their aging parents, and senior citizens are able to care for their grandchildren. Due to the constraints of traditional Chinese family values, Chinese senior citizens inevitably have to take care of their grandchildren ( Yang &amp; Yin, 2022 ). As shown in Table 5 , “ retirement×care ” is an interaction term between “retired or not” and “intergenerational care or not” to assess the effect of retirement on residents' BMI and weight difference in the sample of intergenerational care or not. The estimated coefficients of “intergenerational care” are significantly positive, but the estimated coefficients of the interaction term are significantly negative at 5%. Specifically, women who care for their grandchildren after retirement increase their devBMI and weight by 0.038 and 0.030, respectively, while women who do not care for their grandchildren increase their devBMI and weight by 2.649 and 0.223, respectively. This indicates that retirement has a greater impact on female residents who do not care for their grandchildren, which is more detrimental to maintaining normal BMI levels for this group. 4.3. Robustness tests This section conducts robustness tests on the effectiveness of the above fuzzy regression discontinuity estimation results to identify whether the empirical results are stable in different sample groups. First, we redefine the situation of retirement. In the base-case regression analysis, respondents' subjective responses to the question “Are you retired” are used as the source of the definition of retirement. However, some respondents reported that they are retired but still have a salary income after retirement, which should be excluded from the definition of retirement in the strict sense. The sample of retired respondents whose “monthly after-tax wage income” is not zero is excluded, and the sample is reclassified. As shown in Table 6 , the coefficients of devBMI and weight of retired women increased significantly by 3.545 and 0.298 units, respectively. Compared to the base-case regression analysis in Table 3 , the coefficients increase, but the effect of retirement on men remains not significant and is broadly consistent with the benchmark regression results. Second, we reselect the bandwidth that is different from the base-case regression analysis. In the base-case regression analysis, the sample age is 50–70 years for men and 40–60 years for the women, and replace the age bandwidth of the sample with 54–66 years for men and 44–56 years for women. The sample observations are reduced from 2937 to 1893 for males and from 3159 to 2312 for females. Table 6 shows a significant increase of 3.464 and 0.334 units in devBMI and weight for females after retirement. The coefficients also increase compared to the base-case regression analysis in Table 3 but remain not significant for males, consistent with the findings of the benchmark regression. 4.4. Channel mechanism analysis However, there is still no consensus on how retirement affects BMI levels. Therefore, based on the existing studies, we explore which lifestyle after retirement will affect the devBMI of female residents. The above findings have demonstrated a significant negative effect of retirement on BMI levels in women. In this section, only the female population group is discussed. Considering the database and previous studies, we include “frequency of exercise, frequency of smoking, frequency of alcohol consumption, and sleep duration” as specific lifestyle measures. We include the four channel variables in our mechanistic analysis to analyze their baseline regression results ( Bertoni et al., 2018 ; Eibich, 2015 ). As shown in Table 7 , retirement significantly reduces women's exercise frequency, but retirement did not significantly affect sleep duration, smoking, and alcohol consumption frequency among female residents. This indicates that female residents, although relatively rich in time after retirement, do not increase the frequency of physical exercise due to personal reasons or their family background. If the inclusion of the above channel variables in the regression reduces the extent of the effect of retirement on female devBMI or the results are no longer significant, it reflects that retirement affects resident devBMI through the above channel variables. As shown in Table 8 , after adding four channel variables, the impact of retirement on female devBMI significantly decreased compared to Table 3 . In addition, moderate alcohol consumption positively impacts the BMI level of retired women. However, retirement reduces the frequency of female physical exercise, which reflects that a decrease in exercise frequency will have a negative impact on the BMI level of retired women. Therefore, it is necessary to combine the implementation of the national fitness plan, rely on vacant urban areas such as parks, build suitable facilities for elderly sports and fitness, and widely carry out elderly fitness and sports activities. 5. Conclusions and policy recommendations 5.1. Conclusions This paper investigates the effect of retirement on residents' Body Mass Index based on China Family Panel Studies (CFPS) 2018 data, using China's retirement system as an instrumental variable and using a fuzzy regression discontinuity design, and further explains the relationship through the heterogeneity effect of family size and intergenerational care, which is robust to the findings. The empirical results suggest that: First, there are significant differences in the effects of retirement on resident BMI levels due to gender. The results indicate that retirement is detrimental to females' maintenance of normal BMI levels, and retirement significantly increases devBMI and weight for females but does not significantly affect males. As seen in previous studies, among adult men and women, women are more susceptible to external assessments of their weight or body size. They are more sensitive to body image than men ( Wu &amp; He, 2022 ). Our findings suggest that retirement is more unfavorable to the maintenance of normal BMI levels in the female, which is consistent with previous studies ( Chung et al., 2007 ; Forman-Hoffman et al., 2008 ; Sjösten et al., 2012 ). However, Chinese women's long-standing role as homemakers and caregivers has internalized the way they take care of themselves and reduced their motivation to do so, and is likely to be overlooked by women when faced with the adverse effects of retirement on health issues such as obesity ( Yang et al., 2023 ). Second, an analysis of the family size heterogeneity shows a significant increase in devBMI and weight for the small family size group of women after retirement, with a few effects on the medium and large family size groups of women. Similarly, our study analyzes family size from a gender perspective ( Cong &amp; Silverstein, 2012 ). As family structures tend to become smaller and more nuclear, the proportion of senior citizens living with their children gradually declines, which explains most of the decline in retirement consumption ( Banks et al., 1998 ). It has been shown that anxiety tends to be greater for smaller families, often increasing the chances of early retirement. Small family-size groups of women are less likely to maintain normal levels of BMI after retirement ( Wagner et al., 1985 ; Albuquerque et al., 2009 ). Our results support previous findings that short-term retirement has a better effect on the health status of large families than that of small families. There is a tendency for the health of small-family residents to decline as the duration of retirement increases ( Chauhan et al., 1985 ). And our previous results also confirm that retirement is detrimental to women's maintenance of normal levels of BMI, so the findings are consistent with the above. Third, we find an interesting phenomenon that female residents who engage in intergenerational caregiving are more likely to maintain normal BMI and weight levels, compared to a significant negative effect of retirement on their BMI levels for the group of females who do not engage in intergenerational caregiving. This is consistent with previous theories of role strain, which are representative of how intergenerational caregiving affects the physical and mental health of older adults, and which emphasize the resource and emotional benefits that individuals gain from multiple role-playing in society, which are thought to offset the “Role Strain” caused by multiple role conflicts ( Goode, 1960 ). Intergenerational caregiving gives senior citizens new roles more conducive to combating depression through interactions with the next generation, being positively influenced by caring for grandchildren and gaining intergenerational financial and emotional support, making them more vital ( Tsai et al., 2013 ; Chang &amp; Huang, 2020 ). Retirees with grandchildren spend more time on childcare, which relieves stress through childcare, and also benefits the physical health of older adults by preventing depression and loneliness ( Barrett &amp; Turner, 2005 ; Eibich, 2015 ). It has been suggested that any caregiving experience provides health benefits for grandparents ( Zhou et al., 2017 ) and that children's emotional support is enhanced when grandparents provide more childcare for their adult children ( Cong &amp; Silverstein, 2012 ). One of the unique contributions of our study is the extension of the role of intergenerational caregiving to the effect of retirement on resident BMI; few studies have combined all three, which is uncommon in studies of retirement on health or obesity. Finally, this paper provides a preliminary discussion on the mechanism of the effect of retirement on devBMI . The results show that retirement negatively affects devBMI through channels such as significantly reducing exercise frequency among females. However, retirement has no significant effect on sleep duration, smoking, and alcohol consumption frequency among female residents. This suggests that female residents do not increase exercise frequency despite the relative increase in time after retirement. In addition, moderate alcohol consumption positively affected the BMI levels of retired women. There is a proper reason why women exercise less frequently after retirement than women who continue to work. That is, women may take on more social and family roles after retirement than men. Retired women may need to continue to care for their husbands, grandchildren, and families, thus making them retire only from work rather than from their families ( Forman-Hoffman et al., 2008 ). Each person has a unique role that changes throughout the life course and is influenced by personal as well as social and economic factors ( Riley, 1988 ). 5.2. Policy recommendations Along with the continuous promotion of China's industrial structure transformation and upgrading policies and the accelerated development of the aging population, effectively stimulating social vitality and improving the efficiency of human resource growth are the keys to effectively alleviating the pressure on China's social security payments and protecting the stability of China's economy. It has been shown that delaying retirement can effectively alleviate the financial pressure on China's pension expenditure, thus further solving the problem of human resource shortage and achieving high-quality and sustainable development of China's economy ( Bloom et al., 2015 ; Wang et al., 2019 ). In recent years, many international countries have added delayed retirement policies and raised the statutory retirement age one after another, and gradually raising the retirement age is an international trend ( Axelrad &amp; Mahoney, 2017 ; Chistova, 2016 ; Hofäcker &amp; Naumann, 2015 ). In China's aging shock, how well-delayed retirement works and how to reform the sustainability of the current pension and healthcare social security system has become a topic of great interest. The research findings can provide the following references: First, China proposed gradually delaying the mandatory retirement age following the principles of small-step adjustment, flexible implementation, categorical advancement, and overall balance in 2021. The delayed retirement policy was implemented in Shandong and Jiangsu on a pilot basis in 2022. In optimizing and formulating the delayed retirement policy, it is recommended to develop a flexible one based on fundamental gender differences. The government should not set one-size-fits-all minimum retirement age and should increase flexibility in the retirement age for workers so that those who wish to continue working can remain in the workforce. In addition, retirement puts more pressure on women's devBMI , so the relevant departments should focus on the pre-retirement orientation of women's groups, try to provide them with more moral support and opportunities to participate in social activities, enhance their life satisfaction, and thus reduce the negative impact of retirement on them. Second, family size has declined after reviewing the data of successive national censuses. From 4.41 persons in 1982, 3.96 persons in 1990, 3.44 persons in 2000, and 3.10 persons in 2010 to 2.62 persons in 2020, the average household size in China has dropped to less than three persons. The increasing trend of smaller family sizes requires further improvement of urban functions and expansion of basic public service coverage to meet residents' needs for elderly care and caregiving. Based on physical activity levels, some studies have found an inverse relationship between physical activity and BMI, with those with lower BMI more likely to participate in intense physical activity regularly and good physical fitness helping to offset the risk of diabetes from weight fluctuations ( Kataja-Tuomola et al., 2010 ; Wu &amp; He, 2022 ). It is recommended that communities appropriately pay attention to the potential health effects of retirement on small family sizes by developing more community sports and recreational activities and advocating more participation in family life and social activities for females of small family sizes to reduce the negative effects of retirement shocks. In addition, appropriately developing the universality of the senior university and developing a curriculum program suitable for senior citizens. And combine the senior university with medical knowledge promotion to meet the multiple needs of residents with small family sizes or who have to engage in intergenerational care. Third, intergenerational care is very common in China and has become the primary childcare mode for Chinese families across geographic and class lines. Current research rarely examines the role of senior citizens and the impact of intergenerational care on their later life, as well as the optimization of social policies, from the perspective of retirees' perceptions. Based on the empirical results of intergenerational care, it is recommended that full attention be paid to the intergenerational care of female residents. Residents who need intergenerational care can voluntarily apply to decide whether to retire by themselves ( Laxy et al., 2018 ). However, the results prove that participation in intergenerational care benefits the female resident population, and the individual wishes of retired residents should still prevail. Meanwhile, the development of the childcare service system should be accelerated to improve the specialization of infants and childcare and reduce the intensity of intergenerational care for middle-aged and older people. In addition, the government and the community should actively build comfortable activity places to meet the actual needs of intergenerational care for senior citizens to achieve multi-win outcomes such as intergenerational care, grassroots governance, and mutual help and assistance from neighbors. Finally, the government and the community should combine the implementation of the national fitness program, relying on parks and other vacant urban places to build venues and facilities suitable for the physical fitness of senior citizens and widely carry out fitness and sports activities for senior citizens. At the same time, they should take into account a variety of factors affecting women's BMI and actively build comfortable activity sites that can meet the actual needs of intergenerational care for senior citizens and achieve multi-win results such as intergenerational care, grassroots governance, and mutual help from neighbors, while expanding the space for fitness activities for senior citizens and providing fitness sites that are more suitable for the characteristics and needs of senior citizens. 5.3. Research deficiencies and prospects Several limitations of our team's study are worth discussing. To start with, our team uses cross-sectional data, resulting in an inability to visually analyze the impact of individual BMI fluctuations over time in causality compared to panel data. Further clarification using dynamic longitudinal studies is still needed in the future. Next, BMI is a basic indicator for measuring potential health status, but the effect of BMI on health is still controversial. BMI does not distinguish fat mass, so if individual residents increase muscle mass through activities such as exercise and fitness, the devBMI will also increase, which to some extent causes the effect of retirement on residents' BMI may be smaller than the estimated result. In addition, mental health is also an essential component of residents' health. Our team only considers the effect of retirement on the change in residents' BMI and does not address the mental health of retired residents, which can be explored in future studies with more detailed data sets. Finally, our team analyzes only the sample of residents who answer “yes/no” to the question “Are you retired?” and does not subdivide this group. The effects of mandatory and voluntary retirement on residents' health need to be further investigated, and this is the way forward in our future research. Next, our team will make the following improvements based on the research in this paper: in terms of research data, we will further use panel data to analyze the impact of retirement on personal health changes over time comprehensively at both physical health and mental health levels; in terms of research indicators, based on BMI, we will look for more good physical health indicators such as waist circumference, waist-hip ratio or body fat percentage. However, it is difficult to obtain these indicators, and we are still in contact with the latest database. In terms of research subjects, our team hopes to use the latest data to break down the types of retirement, distinguish mandatory retirement from voluntary retirement, and explore the specific impact of retirement on different groups of people in a targeted manner. Ethical statement This study involves no data collected from human subjects. We only make use of the publicly available de-identified sample. The CFPS national sample was de-identified before making it available for public use. And CFPS was ethically reviewed by the “Biomedical Ethics Committee member of Peking University” (permission numbers: IRB00001052-14010). Funding This study was supported in part by grants from The National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 72204240); The Ministry of education of Humanities and Social Science Project (No. 21YJC790149); Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (No. ZR2020QG045). Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Author statement B. Y and W. L conceived and designed this study and drafted the manuscript. Y. C supervised the data analysis and made additional contributions to its design. All authors contributed to the revision of the manuscript and approved the final manuscript. Acknowledgments There are no acknowledgments in this article. Contributor Information Bin Yuan, Email: yuanbin@ouc.edu.cn. Wei Liu, Email: liuweihbhs@126.com. Yuhu Cui, Email: cui19982020@163.com. Data availability Data will be made available on request. References Albuquerque P., Arcanjo M.M., Escária V. 2009. Early retirement in Portugal. http://hdl.handle.net/10400.5/1821 Allais O., Leroy P., Mink J. Changes in food purchases at retirement in France. Food Policy. 2020;90 doi: 10.1016/j.foodpol.2019.101806. Allel K., León A.S., Staudinger U.M., Calvo E. Healthy retirement begins at school: Educational differences in the health outcomes of early transitions into retirement. Ageing and Society. 2021;41(1):137–157. doi: 10.1017/S0144686X19000928. Anderson K.H., Burkhauser R.V. The retirement-health nexus: A new measure of an old puzzle. Journal of Human Resources. 1985:315–330. doi: 10.2307/145884. Angrist J.D., Krueger A.B. Instrumental variables and the search for identification: From supply and demand to natural experiments. The Journal of Economic Perspectives. 2001;15(4):69–85. doi: 10.1257/jep.15.4.69. Axelrad H., Mahoney K.J. Increasing the pensionable age: What changes are OECD countries making? What considerations are driving policy? Open Journal of Social Sciences. 2017;5(7):56–70. doi: 10.4236/jss.2017.57005. Banks J., Blundell R., Tanner S. Is there a retirement-savings puzzle? The American Economic Review. 1998:769–788. doi: 10.1257/aer.99.5.2209. Barrett G.F., Brzozowski M. Food expenditure and involuntary retirement: Resolving the retirement‐consumption puzzle. American Journal of Agricultural Economics. 2012;94(4):945–955. doi: 10.1093/ajae/aas030. Barrett A.E., Turner R.J. Family structure and mental health: The mediating effects of socioeconomic status, family process, and social stress. Journal of Health and Social Behavior. 2005;46(2):156–169. doi: 10.1177/002214650504600. Bertoni M., Brunello G., Mazzarella G. Does postponing minimum retirement age improve healthy behaviors before retirement? Evidence from middle-aged Italian workers. Journal of Health Economics. 2018;58:215–227. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2018.02.011. Binh Tran D., Zikos V. The causal effect of retirement on health: Understanding the mechanisms. The Australian Economic Review. 2019;52(4):427–446. doi: 10.1111/1467-8462.12340. Bloom D.E., Chatterji S., Kowal P., Lloyd-Sherlock P., McKee M., Rechel B.…Smith J.P. Macroeconomic implications of population ageing and selected policy responses. The Lancet. 2015;385(9968):649–657. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61464-1. Bray G.A. Risks of obesity. Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics. 2003;32(4):787–804. doi: 10.1016/S0889-8529(03)00067-7. Cai F. Regaining China's resource reallocative efficiency to boost growth. China and World Economy. 2023;31(1):5–21. doi: 10.1111/cwe.12456. Cai Y., Cheng Y. Pension reform in China: Challenges and opportunities. China's Economy: A Collection of Surveys. 2015:45–62. doi: 10.1002/9781118982433.ch4. Chang Y., Huang J. Impacts of intergenerational care for grandchildren and intergenerational support on the psychological well-being of the elderly in China. Revista Argentina de Clinica Psicologica. 2020;29(1):57. doi: 10.24205/03276716.2020.8. Chauhan S., Jain R.K., Singh R. Indian Psychological Review; 1985. The effect of retirement and family size on mental health. Chistova E.V. Possibilities for increasing the retirement age in Russia in response to population ageing. Montenegrin. Journal of Economics. 2016;12(3):127. doi: 10.14254/1800-5845.2016/12-3/9. Chung S., Popkin B.M., Domino M.E., Stearns S.C. Effect of retirement on eating out and weight change: An analysis of gender differences. Obesity. 2007;15(4):1053–1060. doi: 10.1038/oby.2007.538. Coe N., Zamarro G. An international comparison (October 1, 2015). CESR-schaeffer working paper. 2015. How does retirement impact health behaviors? An international comparison; pp. 2015–2033. Cong Z., Silverstein M. Caring for grandchildren and intergenerational support in rural China: A gendered extended family perspective. Ageing and Society. 2012;32(3):425–450. doi: 10.1017/S0144686X11000420. Cook T.D. Waiting for life to arrive”: A history of the regression-discontinuity design in psychology, statistics and economics. Journal of Econometrics. 2008;142(2):636–654. doi: 10.1016/j.jeconom.2007.05.002. Dave D., Rashad I., Spasojevic J. The effects of retirement on physical and mental health outcomes. Southern Economic Journal. 2008;75(2):497–523. doi: 10.1002/j.2325-8012.2008.tb00916.x. Doll H.A., Petersen S.E., Stewart-Brown S.L. Obesity and physical and emotional well‐being: Associations between body mass index, chronic illness, and the physical and mental components of the SF‐36 questionnaire. Obesity Research. 2000;8(2):160–170. doi: 10.1038/oby.2000.17. Dong Y., Yang D.T. Mandatory retirement and the consumption puzzle: Disentangling price and quantity declines. Economic Inquiry. 2017;55(4):1738–1758. doi: 10.1111/ecin.12456. Eibich P. Understanding the effect of retirement on health: Mechanisms and heterogeneity. Journal of Health Economics. 2015;43:1–12. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.05.001. Ekerdt D.J., Bosse R., LoCastro J.S. Claims that retirement improves health. Journal of Gerontology. 1983;38(2):231–236. doi: 10.1093/geronj/38.2.231. Feng J., Li Q., Smith J.P. Retirement effect on health status and health behaviors in urban China. World Development. 2020;126 doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2019.104702. Filomena M., Picchio M. Retirement and health outcomes in a meta‐analytical framework. Journal of Economic Surveys. 2022 doi: 10.1111/joes.12527. Forman-Hoffman V.L., Richardson K.K., Yankey J.W., Hillis S.L., Wallace R.B., Wolinsky F.D. Retirement and weight changes among men and women in the health and retirement study. Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. 2008;63(3):S146–S153. doi: 10.1093/geronb/63.3.S146. Frölich M. Parametric and nonparametric regression in the presence of endogenous control variables. International Statistical Review. 2008;76(2):214–227. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-5823.2008.00045.x. Gao F., Li X. From one to three: China's motherhood dilemma and obstacle to gender equality. WomenWise. 2021;1(4):252–266. doi: 10.3390/women1040022. Giles J., Lei X., Wang G., Wang Y., Zhao Y. One country, two systems: Evidence on retirement patterns in China. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance. 2023;22(2):188–210. doi: 10.1017/S1474747221000391. Gilmore J. Vol. 11. Health reports-statistics canada; 1999. pp. 31–44. (Body mass index and health). Giri M., Chen T., Yu W., Lü Y. Prevalence and correlates of cognitive impairment and depression among elderly people in the world's fastest growing city, Chongqing, People's Republic of China. Clinical Interventions in Aging. 2016:1091–1098. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S113668. Goode W.J. A theory of role strain. American Sociological Review. 1960:483–496. doi: 10.2307/2092933. Gorry A., Gorry D., Slavov S.N. Does retirement improve health and life satisfaction? Health Economics. 2018;27(12):2067–2086. doi: 10.1002/hec.3821. Grossman M. On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of Political Economy. 1972;80(2):223–255. doi: 10.1086/259880. Grøtting M.W., Lillebø O.S. Health effects of retirement: Evidence from survey and register data. Journal of Population Economics. 2020;33(2):671–704. doi: 10.1007/s00148-019-00742-9. Guo H., Jiang J., Li Y., Long X., Han J. An aging giant at the center of global warming: Population dynamics and its effect on CO2 emissions in China. Journal of Environmental Management. 2023;327 doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2022.116906. Guo X., Min S., Guo R. The impact of retirement on the physical health status of middle-aged and elderly people:based on ruzzy regression discontinuity design. Journal of Communication University of China(Science and Technology) 2020;(5):46–53. doi: 10.16196/j.cnki.issn.1673-4793.2020.05.008. (In Chinese) Hahn J., Todd P., Van der Klaauw W. Identification and estimation of treatment effects with a regression-discontinuity design. Econometrica. 2001;69(1):201–209. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2692190 Hallberg D., Johansson P., Josephson M. Is an early retirement offer good for your health? Quasi-Experimental evidence from the army. Journal of Health Economics. 2015;44:274–285. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.09.006. Hank K., Korbmacher J.M. Parenthood and retirement: Gender, cohort, and welfare regime differences. European Societies. 2013;15(3):446–461. doi: 10.1080/14616696.2012.750731. Hofäcker D., Naumann E. The emerging trend of work beyond retirement age in Germany. Zeitschrift für Gerontologie und Geriatrie. 2015;48(5):473–479. doi: 10.1007/s00391-014-0669-y. Hu Z., Peng X. Household changes in contemporary China: An analysis based on the four recent censuses. The Journal of Chinese Sociology. 2015;2:1–20. doi: 10.1186/s40711-015-0011-0. Hu J., Stauvermann P.J., Nepal S., Zhou Y. Can the policy of increasing retirement age raise pension revenue in China—a case study of Anhui province. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 2023;20(2):1096. doi: 10.3390/ijerph20021096. Imbens G.W., Lemieux T. Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice. Journal of Econometrics. 2008;142(2):615–635. doi: 10.1016/j.jeconom.2007.05.001. Insler M. The health consequences of retirement. Journal of Human Resources. 2014;49(1):195–233. doi: 10.3368/jhr.49.1.195. Jackson R., Howe N. European papers on the new welfare; 2006. The greying of the middle kingdom: The demographics and economics of retirement policy in China. Kataja-Tuomola M., Sundell J., Männistö S., Virtanen M.J., Kontto J., Albanes D., Virtamo J. Short-term weight change and fluctuation as risk factors for type 2 diabetes in Finnish male smokers. European Journal of Epidemiology. 2010;25:333–339. doi: 10.1007/s10654-010-9444-6. Kuhn A. IZA World of Labor; 2018. The complex effects of retirement on health. Laxy M., Teuner C., Holle R., Kurz C. The association between BMI and health-related quality of life in the US population: Sex, age and ethnicity matters. International Journal of Obesity. 2018;42(3):318–326. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2017.252. Lee D.S., Lemieux T. Regression discontinuity designs in economics. Journal of Economic Literature. 2010;48(2):281–355. doi: 10.1257/jel.48.2.281. Li W. An empirical study on the health of retirement to the working population—based on China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study. American Journal of Industrial and Business Management. 2017;7(4):429–443. doi: 10.4236/ajibm.2017.74031. Li Q., Reuser M., Kraus C., Alho J. Ageing of a giant: A stochastic population forecast for China, 2006–2060. Journal of Population Research. 2009;26:21–50. doi: 10.1007/s12546-008-9004-z. Li H., Shi X., Wu B. The retirement consumption puzzle revisited: Evidence from the mandatory retirement policy in China. Journal of Comparative Economics. 2016;44(3):623–637. doi: 10.1016/j.jce.2015.06.001. Liu G., Li X., Shi J. The impact of retirement on health status of residents in China——based on the data of China Family Panel Studies in 2010. Health Economics Research. 2017;(7):3–6. doi: 10.14055/j.cnki.33-1056/f.20170705.018. (In Chinese) Liu J., Rozelle S., Xu Q., Yu N., Zhou T. Social engagement and elderly health in China: Evidence from the China health and retirement longitudinal survey (CHARLS) International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 2019;16(2):278. doi: 10.3390/ijerph16020278. Liu J., Xu S. Retirement policy, employment status, and gender pay gap in urban China. Journal of Asian Economics. 2023 doi: 10.1016/j.asieco.2023.101587. Liu G.G., Zhao Z., Cai R., Yamada T., Yamada T. Equity in health care access to: Assessing the urban health insurance reform in China. Social Science &amp; Medicine. 2002;55(10):1779–1794. doi: 10.1016/S0277-9536(01)00306-9. McGarry K. Health and retirement do changes in health affect retirement expectations? Journal of Human Resources. 2004;39(3):624–648. doi: 10.1016/j.jvb.2014.01.006. Mustafa W.M.W., Islam M.A., Asyraf M., Hassan M.S., Royhan P., Rahman S. The effects of financial attitudes, financial literacy and health literacy on sustainable financial retirement planning: The moderating role of the financial advisor. Sustainability. 2023;15(3):2677. doi: 10.3390/su15032677. National Bureau of Statistics . 2021. The main data of the seventh national census. http://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/sjjd/202302/t20230202_1896484.html Picchio M., Ours J.C.V. Mental health effects of retirement. De Economist. 2020;168(3):419–452. doi: 10.1007/s10645-020-09369-8. Popkin B.M., Kim S., Rusev E.R., Du S., Zizza C. Measuring the full economic costs of diet, physical activity and obesity‐related chronic diseases. Obesity Reviews. 2006;7(3):271–293. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-789X.2006.00230.x. Riley M.W. On the significance of age in sociology. Social Structures And Human Lives. 1988;1:24–45. Sjösten N., Kivimäki M., Singh-Manoux A., Ferrie J.E., Goldberg M., Zins M.…Vahtera J. Change in physical activity and weight in relation to retirement: The French GAZEL cohort study. BMJ Open. 2012;2(1) doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000522. Smith J.P., Strauss J., Zhao Y. Healthy aging in China. The Journal Of The Economics Of Ageing. 2014;4:37–43. doi: 10.1016/j.jeoa.2014.08.006. Terza J.V., Basu A., Rathouz P.J. Two-stage residual inclusion estimation: Addressing endogeneity in health econometric modeling. Journal of Health Economics. 2008;27(3):531–543. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2007.09.009. Thistlethwaite D.L., Campbell D.T. Regression-discontinuity analysis: An alternative to the ex post facto experiment. Journal of Educational Psychology. 1960;51(6):309. doi: 10.1037/h0044319. Tsai F.J., Motamed S., Rougemont A. The protective effect of taking care of grandchildren on elders' mental health? Associations between changing patterns of intergenerational exchanges and the reduction of elders' loneliness and depression between 1993 and 2007 in Taiwan. BMC Public Health. 2013;13:1–9. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-13-567. Tu W.J., Zeng X., Liu Q. Aging tsunami coming: The main finding from China's seventh national population census. Aging-Clinical &amp; Experimental Research. 2021:1–5. doi: 10.1007/s40520-021-02017-4. Van der Klaauw W. Regression–discontinuity analysis: A survey of recent developments in economics. Labour. 2008;22(2):219–245. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9914.2008.00419.x. Wagner M.E., Schubert H.J., Schubert D.S. Family size effects: A review. The Journal of Genetic Psychology. 1985;146(1):65–78. doi: 10.1080/00221325.1985.9923449. Wang H., Huang J., Yang Q. Assessing the financial sustainability of the pension plan in China: The role of fertility policy adjustment and retirement delay. Sustainability. 2019;11(3):883. doi: 10.3390/su11030883. Wu J., He L. The relationship between body mass index and physical activity participation rate design based on fuzzy breakpoint regression design. Journal of Sensors. 2022 doi: 10.1155/2022/3721659. 2022. Xu S., Zhang J. Do social pensions affect the physical and mental health of rural children in China? An intergenerational care perspective. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 2022;19(7):3949. doi: 10.3390/ijerph19073949. Yang H.L., Tao Y.W., Cheng S.M., Tang X.Q., Cao J.Y., Shen D.F. SSM-Population Health; 2023. The effect of retirement on obesity in women: Evidence from China. Yang X., Yin D. The protective effect of caring for grandchildren on the mental health of the elderly: A structural equation modeling analysis. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 2022;19(3):1255. doi: 10.3390/ijerph19031255. Zang E. Spillover effects of a husband's retirement on a woman's health: Evidence from urban China. Social Science &amp; Medicine. 2020;245 doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112684. Zhang Y., Salm M., van Soest A. The effect of retirement on healthcare utilization: Evidence from China. Journal of Health Economics. 2018;62:165–177. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2018.09.009. Zhang C., Xie Y. Family structure change and social stratification (Part I): Integration of research perspectives. Journal of China Women's University. 2022;(5) doi: 10.13277/j.cnki.jcwu.2022.05.002. Zheng Z. From the past to the future: What we learn from China's 2020 census. China Population and Development Studies. 2021;5(2):101–106. doi: 10.1007/s42379-021-00084-8. Zhou J., Mao W., Lee Y., Chi I. The impact of caring for grandchildren on grandparents' physical health outcomes: The role of intergenerational support. Research on Aging. 2017;39(5):612–634. doi: 10.1177/0164027515623332. Zou H., Luan B.J., Peng Z.C., Yu K.Z. Does retirement change the health behavior of urban older adults? Evidence based on regression discontinuity design of alcohol and tobacco consumption. Forestry Studies. 2018;6:112–128. doi: 10.14116/j.nkes.2018.06.007. Associated Data Data Availability Statement Data will be made available on request.