3880 neurorep Neuropsychopharmacology Reports Neuropsychopharmacol Rep Wiley PMC10932769 10932769 10932769 37987035 10.1002/npr2.12401 The use of sertraline to treat an adolescent of dystonia comorbid with major depressive disorder with psychotic features Liu Chia‐Chien 1 Lan Chen‐Chia 1 ✉ Chen Ying‐Sheue 2 3 1 Department of Psychiatry, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan 2 Department of Psychiatry, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan 3 Department of Psychiatry, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan * Correspondence , Chen‐Chia Lan, No. 1650, Taiwan Boulevard Sect. 4, Xitun Dist., Taichung, Taiwan. Email: drblue3305@gmail.com ✉ Corresponding author. 20 11 2023 44 1 275 275–279 14 3 2024 © 2023 The Authors. Neuropsychopharmacology Reports published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of The Japanese Society of Neuropsychopharmacology. This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes. Abstract Dystonia is characterized by sustained or intermittent involuntary muscle contractions. Psychiatric symptoms are essential non‐motor features of dystonia, and higher risks of depressive and anxiety disorders have been reported. The precedence of psychiatric to motor symptoms in some patients and the dopaminergic and serotonergic system involvement in both the motor and psychiatric aspects suggest these psychiatric disorders may be intrinsic to the neurobiology of dystonia. Nevertheless, psychiatric comorbidities are often construed as secondary reactions to motor disabilities and the negative bio‐psycho‐social impacts of dystonia, leading to underdiagnosis and undertreatment. Research on antidepressant use in dystonia is scarce, especially in children and adolescents. This report presents a 17‐year‐old female with dystonia comorbid with depression with psychotic features, whose motor symptoms improved but psychiatric symptoms persisted with dopaminergic pharmacotherapy. Sertraline was finally added 5 years after the onset and successfully managed her psychotic depression without worsening motor symptoms. Early detection, prompt diagnosis, and timely holistic treatment with dopaminergic agents, antidepressants, and psychosocial interventions are critical for the mental health of dystonia patients. Keywords: antidepressants, comorbidity, depression, dystonia, SSRI Psychiatric symptoms are essential non‐motor features of dystonia, and higher risks of depressive and anxiety disorders have been reported. The involvement of the dopaminergic and serotonergic systems in both the motor and psychiatric aspects suggests these psychiatric disorders may be intrinsic to the neurobiology of dystonia. Research on antidepressant use in dystonia is scarce, especially in children and adolescents. This report presents a 17‐year‐old female with dystonia comorbid with depression with psychotic features, and sertraline successfully managed her psychotic depression without worsening motor symptoms. status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Revised 2023 Oct 21; Received 2023 Jul 26; Accepted 2023 Nov 4; Collection date 2024 Mar. 1. INTRODUCTION Dystonia is a movement disorder characterized by sustained or intermittent muscle contractions causing abnormal movement and posture. 1 Non‐motor features of dystonia, including psychiatric symptoms, are gaining awareness. 2 , 3 Dystonia patients have higher risks of psychiatric disorders, 4 , 5 and major depressive disorder and anxiety disorders are the most common, with estimated lifetime prevalence rates of 12%–71% in adults 2 , 5 and around 23% in pediatric patients. 6 Depression and anxiety disorders are frequently recognized as secondary to motor disabilities, pain, disfigurement, negative body concept, low self‐esteem, and impaired quality of life (QoL) caused by dystonia, 7 leading to their under‐recognition and undertreatment. However, psychiatric comorbidities may degrade the QoL even more than the motor symptoms 8 , 9 and are often more distressing for dystonia patients and their families. Dopaminergic medications, botulinum toxin injections, and deep brain stimulation (DBS) are effective treatments for dystonia. 10 , 11 Despite the potential antidepressant effects, psychiatric comorbidities sometimes do not respond to dopaminergic agents or DBS. 12 Therefore, holistic approaches and interventions for motor and psychiatric symptoms have been emphasized. 4 Studies concerning the treatment of depression in dystonia patients are scarce. We report an adolescent with generalized dystonia whose major depressive disorder with psychotic features was successfully treated with sertraline. 2. CASE PRESENTATION A 17‐year‐old female visited the psychiatric clinic in 2020 because of mood instability. She was a kind and healthy child with typical development before the onset of dystonia. Initially, intermittent oculogyric crises, persistent mouth opening, dysarthria, and hoarseness developed since age 10. Mouth twitching, drooling, and dysphagia gradually became more prominent. These conditions demonstrated diurnal fluctuations and worsened in the afternoon and evening. Several months later, right‐hand tremors caused poor handwriting and micrography. A dystonic–spastic gait with the extension of the elbows and flexion of the wrists and valgus knee also developed, causing several falling incidents. The patient visited several hospitals where examinations, including blood cells, biochemistry, trace elements, nerve conduction studies, electromyography, and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), showed unremarkable findings and no definite diagnosis could be made. Therapeutic trials with steroids and pregabalin were ineffective. At school, classmates mockingly imitated her dysarthric speech, making her angry, irritable, crying‐prone, and sad. She visited a psychiatrist but was suspected of malingering. At age 12, she moved back to Taiwan due to poor adjustment at school abroad. She was diagnosed with abnormal involuntary movements and suspected Segawa disease by a neurologist because of reduced 3‐methoxy‐4‐hydroxyphenylethylene glycol and homovanillic acid levels in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), suggesting tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency. Oral levodopa/benserazide 100 mg/25 mg twice daily was initiated. She could protrude her tongue voluntarily, chew with less drooling, talk with less dysarthria, and walk without a previous spastic–dystonic gait when on medication. However, these dystonic symptoms would recur without taking levodopa/benserazide in the afternoon. Despite the motor improvements during levodopa/benserazide treatment with dosages up to 100 mg/25 mg 2.5 tablets twice daily through the following years, her depressive symptoms were exacerbated. Low mood, crying spells, loss of interest in playing musical instruments, hypoactivity with decreasing exercise, social withdrawal, and a suicidal attempt by jumping off a building aborted by rescue were noted. The above psychiatric symptoms ameliorated but never subsided after reducing levodopa/benserazide dosage or switching to levodopa/carbidopa 100 mg/25 mg 0.5 tablet thrice daily. In 2019, intermittent agitation, violence toward parents, and psychosis, including persecutory delusion and auditory hallucinations of voice commanding for self‐harm, developed without concurrent adjustments of anti‐parkinsonian agents. She was admitted to the neurological ward for intravenous immunoglobulin treatment for suspected autoimmune encephalitis, which was ineffective. A more detailed survey was arranged 3 months later during a second neurological ward hospitalization. The serum ceruloplasmin and 24‐h urine copper levels, autoimmune antibodies, electroencephalography, and sensory/motor evoked potentials were normal. Whole‐exome sequencing of the patient and her parents found no pathogenetic variants of the known dystonia‐related genes. Brain technetium‐99 m labeled tropane derivative single photon emission computerized tomography ([ 99m Tc]TRODAT‐1 SPECT) demonstrated decreased dopamine transporter (DAT) activity in bilateral putamen and caudate nuclei, and MRI found the absent swallow‐tail sign over the bilateral substantia nigra, which not typical for Segawa disease. The diagnosis was then revised to early‐onset dopamine‐responsive dystonia and parkinsonism. A midazolam infusion for status dystonia and a botulinum toxin injection over the bilateral masseter and pterygoid muscles were performed. Rotigotine replaced carbidopa/levodopa due to suspected drug‐induced dyskinesia, and anticholinergics were also prescribed. These medications partially relieved the motor symptoms but were not beneficial for her psychiatric symptoms. The psychological assessment with the Beck Depression Inventory‐Second Edition and Symptom Checklist‐90‐Revised revealed depression, high interpersonal sensitivity, hostility, phobic anxiety, and paranoid ideation. She refused to treat depression with sodium valproate at the time. She was continuously maintained with transdermal rotigotine 6 mg daily after discharge for about 1–2 years with the improvement of dystonia, although diurnal fluctuation persisted. In 2020, her depressive symptoms and violent behaviors toward her parents were aggravated. Although sodium valproate 200 mg daily was added, the persecutory delusion persisted that she had reported physical abuse by her parents and caretakers to the police. Her dystonia also worsened with severe dysarthria, drooling, and difficulty standing. During a third neurology ward admission, the dystonia symptoms partially improved when rotigotine was replaced by levodopa/carbidopa 95 mg/23.75 mg twice daily. Nevertheless, persistent psychiatric symptoms were disturbing, and she frequently mentioned euthanasia. During the psychiatric diagnostic interview, she sat in a wheelchair with difficulty expressing herself verbally and in writing due to severe dysarthria and hand tremors. A mental status examination revealed a patient with a depressed mood, crying and agitated, and demonstrating an aggressive attitude toward her mother related to persecutory delusion. Under the impression of a major depressive disorder with psychotic features, an antidepressant with sertraline 50 mg daily was initiated and increased to 50 mg twice daily since the second week. Psychotic symptoms and aggressive behaviors reduced significantly 1 month later, and she became happy and friendly to others. Symptoms of generalized dystonia persisted, but the severity also decreased, paralleling the improvement of psychiatric symptoms. She could express her ideas clearly and logically through handwriting and performed simple self‐care routines. Remission of depressive symptoms and improved psychosocial function, self‐esteem, and social interaction were achieved after 4 months of continuous maintenance with sertraline 100 mg/day. No significant side effect except occasional daytime sleepiness was experienced. Individual psychotherapy, a special educational program, and frequent attendance at religious activities gave her massive psychological support. 3. DISCUSSION This report presents an adolescent girl with chronic generalized dystonia and long‐term major depressive disorder with psychotic features treated effectively after combining an antidepressant, sertraline, with dopaminergic agents. Neither adverse effects nor motor symptoms worsening were observed. Dystonia in childhood and adolescence is usually chronic and generalized, significantly impairing motor, physical, and daily psychosocial functioning. 13 Despite the high prevalence of depressive and anxiety disorders among adolescent dystonia patients, the diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric comorbidities are usually delayed. Although our patient had prominent emotional symptoms since the onset of dystonia, she was even suspected of malingering. Antidepressant treatment was initiated more than 5 years after the initial onset, when she became severely depressed, aggressive, and psychotic. Whether these psychiatric symptoms represent a primary disorder phenotype, a secondary sequela, or both is controversial. The psychiatric comorbidity of chronic dystonia is usually considered a secondary emotional reaction to motor disabilities and their negative bio‐psycho‐social impacts. 7 Nevertheless, psychiatric symptoms may precede the onset of motor signs, 14 and associations were reported between dystonia‐related genes and psychiatric disorders, 15 suggesting these psychiatric comorbidities are primary and intrinsic to the neurobiology of dystonia. Dystonia is assumed to be a disorder of the dopaminergic system, and low L‐dopa concentrations have been linked to dystonia, fatigue, and depression. 16 Lower striatal DAT and dopamine D 2/3 receptor binding potentials were found in cervical dystonia patients with depression compared to those without. 17 The involvement of serotonin in dystonia is suggested by CSF and SPECT studies. 16 , 18 Lower CSF serotonin metabolites have also been found in children with dopa‐responsive dystonia. 19 Furthermore, a trend toward decreased diencephalon/midbrain serotonin transporter availability in cervical dystonia patients with depression was reported. 20 Therefore, the dopaminergic and serotonergic system aberrations are linked to both the motor and psychiatric symptoms of dystonia. Accordingly, treating depression in dystonia with relevant biological agents is essential, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI), and norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI) are primary candidates. Up to now, the only investigation of antidepressant treatment in dystonia reported no differences between escitalopram, an SSRI, and placebo on either the motor or psychiatric symptoms or QoL 21 but found a positive correlation between the midbrain/diencephalon serotonin transporter occupancy and subjective improvements in dystonia and psychiatric symptoms. 22 Evidence regarding antidepressant use in Parkinson's disease (PD), although not definitive, provides references for managing depression in dystonia. The International Parkinson Disease and Movement Disorder Society identified SSRIs, including sertraline, citalopram, paroxetine, and fluoxetine, and an SNRI, venlafaxine, as possibly useful for depression in PD. 23 Furthermore, SSRI or SNRI treatment significantly improved depression and freezing of gait in PD with good tolerability, 24 while bupropion, an NDRI, was effective for depressive symptoms, especially apathy. 25 Potential motor adverse effects, however, cause hesitation in using antidepressants movement disorders. Analyzing the World Health Organization pharmacovigilance database, SSRIs demonstrated increased risks of akathisia, bruxism, dystonia, myoclonus, parkinsonism, restless leg syndrome (RLS), tardive dyskinesia (TD), tics, and tremor, while SNRIs were associated with bruxism, RLS, TD, and tremor. 26 Specifically, dystonia was linked to fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, and paroxetine. Dopamine‐release inhibition by serotonin 5‐HT 2 agonism may underlie these associations. 27 Bupropion exhibited a favorable motor side effect profile with only higher tremor risks, 26 but potential exacerbations of psychosis limit its use in psychotic depression. 28 Sertraline is an SSRI extensively used in child and adolescent depression 29 with a favorable side effect profile and low potential for pharmacokinetic drug interactions or psychotic exacerbations. Sertraline 50 mg daily was effective and well‐tolerated in treating depression in PD. 30 In our patient, dopaminergic medication had significantly improved the motor symptoms, but the psychiatric symptoms remained severely disturbing. After sertraline 50–100 mg daily for a few weeks, her depressive, psychotic, and aggressive symptoms improved. The conflict and tension between her and her family members were relieved. The satisfactory outcome suggests that antidepressants are beneficial for depression in dystonia. 4. CONCLUSION This is the first case report about antidepressants for depressive disorder in pediatric dystonia. Sertraline effectively and safely managed the psychotic depression and motor symptoms. Attributing depression solely to secondary reactions to the disabilities and social distresses related to dystonia hinders pharmacotherapy for these psychiatric disorders, which may be primary in origin due to intrinsic neurobiology alterations. We emphasize that early detection, diagnosis, and holistic treatment with dopaminergic agents, antidepressants, and psychosocial interventions are crucial to patients' and caretakers' mental health and QoL. Further research on antidepressant use in dystonia patients comorbid with depressive disorder, especially in children and adolescents, is warranted. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Chia‐Chien Liu constructed the first draft. Ying‐Sheue Chen and Chen‐Chia Lan reviewed and revised the intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. FUNDING INFORMATION This case report received no funding support. CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors declare no conflict of interest. ETHICS STATEMENT Approval of the Research Protocol by an Institutional Reviewer Board: N/A. Informed Consent: N/A. Registry and the Registration No. of the Study/trial: N/A. Animal Studies: N/A. Liu C‐C, Lan C‐C, Chen Y‐S. The use of sertraline to treat an adolescent of dystonia comorbid with major depressive disorder with psychotic features. Neuropsychopharmacol Rep. 2024;44:275–279. 10.1002/npr2.12401 DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT All the data supporting the findings are shown in the report. REFERENCES 1. Albanese A, Bhatia K, Bressman SB, Delong MR, Fahn S, Fung VSC, et al. Phenomenology and classification of dystonia: a consensus update. Mov Disord. 2013;28(7):863–873. 2. Kuyper DJ, Parra V, Aerts S, Okun MS, Kluger BM. Nonmotor manifestations of dystonia: a systematic review. Mov Disord. 2011;26(7):1206–1217. 3. Stamelou M, Edwards MJ, Hallett M, Bhatia KP. The non‐motor syndrome of primary dystonia: clinical and pathophysiological implications. Brain. 2012;135(Pt 6):1668–1681. 4. Smit M, Kuiper A, Han V, Jiawan VCR, Douma G, van Harten B, et al. Psychiatric co‐morbidity is highly prevalent in idiopathic cervical dystonia and significantly influences health‐related quality of life: results of a controlled study. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2016;30:7–12. 5. Fabbrini G, Berardelli I, Moretti G, Pasquini M, Bloise M, Colosimo C, et al. Psychiatric disorders in adult‐onset focal dystonia: a case‐control study. Mov Disord. 2010;25(4):459–465. 6. Ben‐Pazi H, Jaworowski S, Shalev RS. Cognitive and psychiatric phenotypes of movement disorders in children: a systematic review. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2011;53:1077–1084. 7. Lewis L, Butler A, Jahanshahi M. Depression in focal, segmental and generalized dystonia. J Neurol. 2008;255(11):1750–1755. 8. Timmers ER, Kuiper A, Smit M, Bartels AL, Kamphuis DJ, Wolf NI, et al. Non‐motor symptoms and quality of life in dopa‐responsive dystonia patients. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2017;45:57–62. 9. Junker J, Berman BD, Hall J, Wahba DW, Brandt V, Perlmutter JS, et al. Quality of life in isolated dystonia: non‐motor manifestations matter. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2021;92(6):jnnp‐2020‐325193. 10. Kim R, Jeon B, Lee WW. A systematic review of treatment outcome in patients with Dopa‐responsive dystonia (DRD) and DRD‐plus. Movement Disorders Clinical Practice. 2016;3:435–442. 11. Bohn E, Goren K, Switzer L, Falck‐Ytter Y, Fehlings D. Pharmacological and neurosurgical interventions for individuals with cerebral palsy and dystonia: a systematic review update and meta‐analysis. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2021;63(9):1038–1050. 12. Schaeffer E, Berg D. Dopaminergic therapies for non‐motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease. CNS Drugs. 2017;31(7):551–570. 13. Fernández‐Alvarez E, Nardocci N. Update on pediatric dystonias: etiology, epidemiology, and management. Degener Neurol Neuromuscul Dis. 2012;2:29–41. 14. Moraru E, Schnider P, Wimmer A, Wenzel T, Birner P, Griengl H, et al. Relation between depression and anxiety in dystonic patients: implications for clinical management. Depress Anxiety. 2002;16(3):100–103. 15. Mencacci NE, Reynolds R, Ruiz SG, Vandrovcova J, Forabosco P, Sánchez‐Ferrer A, et al. Dystonia genes functionally converge in specific neurons and share neurobiology with psychiatric disorders. Brain. 2020;143(9):2771–2787. 16. Timmers ER, van Faassen M, Smit M, Kuiper A, Hof IH, Kema IP, et al. Dopaminergic and serotonergic alterations in plasma in three groups of dystonia patients. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2021;91:48–54. 17. Zoons E, Tijssen MAJ, Dreissen YEM, Speelman JD, Smit M, Booij J. The relationship between the dopaminergic system and depressive symptoms in cervical dystonia. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2017;44(8):1375–1382. 18. Smit M, García DV, de Jong BM, Zoons E, Booij J, Dierckx RA, et al. Relationships between serotonin transporter binding in the raphe nuclei, basal ganglia, and hippocampus with clinical symptoms in cervical dystonia: a [11C]DASB positron emission tomography study. Front Neurol. 2018;9(FEB):88. 19. Smit M, Bartels AL, van Faassen M, Kuiper A, Niezen‐Koning KE, Kema IP, et al. Serotonergic perturbations in dystonia disorders‐a systematic review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2016;65:264–275. 20. Zoons E, Booij J, Speelman JD, Dreissen YEM, Smit M, Tijssen MAJ. Lower serotonin transporter binding in patients with cervical dystonia is associated with psychiatric symptoms. EJNMMI Res. 2017;7:7. 21. Zoons E, Booij J, Delnooz CCS, Dijk JM, Dreissen YEM, Koelman JHTM, et al. Randomised controlled trial of escitalopram for cervical dystonia with dystonic jerks/tremor. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2018;89(6):579–585. 22. Zoons E, Tijssen MAJ, Dreissen YEM, Smit M, Booij J. The effect of escitalopram on central serotonergic and dopaminergic systems in patients with cervical dystonia, and its relationship with clinical treatment effects: a double‐blind placebo‐ controlled trial. Biomolecules. 2020;10(6):880. 23. Seppi K, Ray Chaudhuri K, Coelho M, Fox SH, Katzenschlager R, Perez Lloret S, et al. Update on treatments for nonmotor symptoms of Parkinson's disease‐an evidence‐based medicine review. Movement disorders: official journal of the Movement Disorder Society, 34(2), 180–198. 24. Takahashi M, Tabu H, Ozaki A, Hamano T, Takeshima T. Antidepressants for depression, apathy, and gait instability in parkinson's disease: a multicenter randomized study. Intern Med. 2019;58(3):361–368. 25. Vismara M, Benatti B, Nicolini G, Cova I, Monfrini E, Di Fonzo A, et al. Clinical uses of bupropion in patients with Parkinson's disease and comorbid depressive or neuropsychiatric symptoms: a scoping review. BMC Neurol. 2022;22(1):169. 26. Revet A, Revet A, Revet A, Montastruc F, Montastruc F, Montastruc F, et al. Antidepressants and movement disorders: a postmarketing study in the world pharmacovigilance database. BMC Psychiatry. 2020;20(1):308. 27. Alex KD, Pehek EA. Pharmacologic mechanisms of serotonergic regulation of dopamine neurotransmission. Pharmacology and Therapeutics. 2007;113:296–320. 28. Kumar S, Kodela S, Detweiler JG, Kim KY, Detweiler MB. Bupropion‐induced psychosis: folklore or a fact? A systematic review of the literature. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2011;33(6):612–617. 29. Liu W, Li G, Wang C, Wang X, Yang L. Efficacy of sertraline combined with cognitive behavioral therapy for adolescent depression: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis. Comput Math Methods Med. 2021;2021:5309588. 30. Hauser RA, Zesiewicz TA. Sertraline for the treatment of depression in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord. 1997;12(5):756–759. Associated Data Data Availability Statement All the data supporting the findings are shown in the report.