pmc Explor Res Clin Soc Pharm Explor Res Clin Soc Pharm 4203 ercsp Exploratory Research in Clinical and Social Pharmacy 2667-2766 Elsevier PMC12149642 PMC12149642.1 12149642 12149642 40495882 10.1016/j.rcsop.2025.100615 S2667-2766(25)00056-3 100615 1 Article Parent perspectives on a pharmacist-disseminated vaping educational tool for vaping prevention Abraham Olufunmilola olufunmilola.abraham@uky.edu a ⁎ Quach Virginia b Li Jenny S. b a University of Kentucky, College of Pharmacy, 789 S. Limestone Street, Room 292K, Lexington, KY 40536, United States of America b University of Wisconsin, Madison School of Pharmacy, 777 Highland Ave, Madison, WI 53705, United States of America ⁎ Corresponding author at: 789 S. Limestone Street, Room 292K, Lexington, KY 40536, United States of America. olufunmilola.abraham@uky.edu 9 2025 15 5 2025 19 490062 100615 25 9 2024 13 4 2025 15 5 2025 15 05 2025 10 06 2025 11 06 2025 © 2025 The Authors 2025 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). Background Adolescent e-cigarette use is a major public health issue which can lead to respiratory damage and mental health problems. However, there is a lack of reliable educational resources for adolescents and parents. A vaping educational tool can educate parents about e-cigarettes and support discussions with their children. Pharmacists can leverage their accessibility to integrate educating families about vaping within their practice. This study aimed to explore parent perspectives on adolescent vaping, a pharmacist-led vaping educational tool, and pharmacists' potential role in vaping intervention and prevention. Methods Parents of adolescents were recruited for virtual semi-structured interviews on vaping knowledge, opinions on pharmacist vaping intervention, and feedback on the Pharmacist-led E -cigarette and Vaping Educational Resource (pH-EVER). Interviews were analyzed on Dedoose software with inductive thematic analysis. Results Interviews from 46 parents led to five primary themes: vaping knowledge, exposure, and opinions; pH-EVER availability, feedback and usage; parental and school role in vaping intervention; receptiveness to learning about vaping; and pharmacist role in vaping intervention. Most participants expressed that they had limited vaping knowledge but were aware of some health consequences. Participants found the Ph-EVER to be useful for starting conversations with family. Many participants trusted and respected pharmacists to receive education from them. The Ph-EVER was described as important with potential use to inform and initiate conversations with adolescents on e-cigarette risks. Conclusion Parent participants found the Ph-EVER to be a helpful educational tool that can be disseminated in public settings with further need to explore integration into pharmacy practice. Highlights • The Pharmacist-led E-cigarette and Vaping Educational Resource (pH-EVER) can educate parents on risks of adolescent vaping. • Most parents are receptive to learning about e-cigarettes and vaping from a pharmacist. • Pharmacists are reliable public resources for health information and can play a key role in adolescent vaping prevention. Keywords Parent Adolescent Pharmacist E-cigarette Vaping Prevention Intervention pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement no pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY-NC-ND 1 Introduction The use of electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes), also commonly known as vapes, has increased dramatically in recent years, with adolescents and young adults being some of the most common users of these nicotine-containing products. 1 E -cigarettes are battery-operated devices that sometimes resemble cigarettes or common household items and deliver vaporized nicotine into lungs. 2 While traditional cigarette smoking has decreased in the last 20 years from 70 % in 1991 to 28.9 % in 2017, the United States has experienced a rise of adolescent vaping and the renormalization of nicotine consumption in these new forms. 3 There was a 10 % increase in adolescent e-cigarette use from 2017 to 2018 alone, roughly equivalent to 1.3 million youth. 4 In 2020, adolescent nicotine vaping continued its prevalence with 22 % of youth vaping in the past 30 days. 5 Vapor inhaled from e-cigarettes can lead to issues with oral health, respiratory problems, nicotine dependence, and mental health problems such as depression, suicidality and other psychiatric symptoms. 2 , 6 Flavoring components of e-cigarettes have been associated with bronchiolitis obliterans which can cause respiratory problems such as obstructive lung disease. 7 Other known toxic and irritating substances like formaldehyde and acrolein have been identified in e-cigarette exposure, these compounds have been associated with changes in mucus secretion, epithelial response and inflammatory response in the respiratory system. 7 Data analysis on adolescents using e-cigarettes reveal that current and lifetime e-cigarette users have increased likelihood of experiencing depressive symptoms and suicidal ideation compared to nonusers. 8 Furthermore, e-cigarette advertisements targeted at adolescents have exploded in recent decades. From 2014 to 2016, over 78 % of middle and high school students were exposed to at least one advertisement for e-cigarettes. 9 This targeted marketing poses e-cigarettes as appealing towards youth, increasing their risk to vape. With more youth using e-cigarettes, the health risks of vaping are even more profound due to their current state of rapid physical and mental development. 10 Moreover, nicotine exposure during adolescence has been connected to cognitive deficits, memory impairment and decline in overall brain function for youth. 3 Though vaping education is more necessary than ever now, this topic is often challenging to disseminate among adolescents and parents. According to findings from the 2012 National Youth Tobacco Survey, one in three adolescents reported that e-cigarettes were less harmful than traditional cigarettes. 6 Although the long term health effects of e-cigarettes are not fully understood, the safety of these products should not be assumed. 6 Adolescents most often learn about vaping from social media and peers, revealing the need for reliable education and development of resources with accurate information about e-cigarettes. Parents often face similar challenges as adolescents when it comes to identifying trustworthy resources and education on vaping. In a study on parent awareness and perceptions of JUUL and other e-cigarette brands, only 44.2 % of parents could accurately identify an image of a vaping device. 11 Furthermore, 60 % of parents indicated concerns about adolescent use of e-cigarettes, but 73.5 % of parents indicated that they do not receive information from their child's school about vaping or other associated products. 11 Parents and adolescents need access to reliable information and potential education from health care professionals regarding the risks of vaping and use of e-cigarettes. Furthermore, pharmacists are seen as some of the most easily accessible health care professionals in the community, where 90 % of Americans live within five miles of a pharmacy. 12 Additionally, studies have demonstrated that patients visit community pharmacies nearly twice as much as primary care offices, further emphasizing the accessibility of pharmacies along with the potential role pharmacists can play in patient education for lifestyle changes. 12 Educational handouts have also shown success in assisting providers during health care visits and expanding access to resources for families. Caregivers have indicated that handouts for health-related issues such as food allergies have been useful in easing mental and emotional aspects of managing allergies along with being useful and comprehensive. 13 Furthermore, development of a vaping educational handout could serve a similar purpose for providers and families. This study aimed to identify parent perspectives on adolescent e-cigarette use, the potential use of a pharmacist-disseminated vaping educational tool, and the potential role pharmacists could play in vaping intervention and prevention. 2 Methods 2.1 Research team The research team was based in Madison, Wisconsin, at a large midwestern university with a primarily white and well-educated population in the surrounding areas. The study team consisted of an experienced qualitative and adolescent health researcher and tenured professor (OA), two pharmacy students originally from Wisconsin (VQ, CK), a female PhD student with a pharmacist background (JSL), and two research specialists with non-pharmacy, health research backgrounds (TM, JP). The primary lead for data collection, JSL, worked primarily in adolescent vaping prevention research, particularly with leveraging pharmacists in this endeavor, so her biases and influence should be considered in the findings of this study. 2.2 Development of study instruments Investigators (OA, JSL) developed the Pharmacist-led E -cigarette and Vaping Educational Resource (pH-EVER) as an infographic on adolescent vaping based on feedback from pharmacists, adolescents, and parents from previous studies. 14 ( Fig. 1 ) The aim of this educational tool is to increase parental awareness of the dangers of adolescent vaping along with available resources for addressing vaping. This is the first study to gather parent perspectives on the Ph-EVER, with the intention to revise the tool based on these findings. The infographic referenced existing vaping resources from the Centers for Disease Control, the CATCH My Breath Parent Toolkit, Beaumont Health, ConsumerSafety.org , Truth Initiative, and Smokefree.gov Initiative. 15. , 16. , 17. , 18. , 19. , 20. This vaping educational tool shared about dangerous ingredients in e-cigarettes, consequences of adolescent vaping, signs that someone is vaping, talking with an adolescent about vaping, and resources for quitting vaping. References were listed at the bottom of the infographic. The semi-structured interview guide was adapted from prior research by the study team developed on vaping and a study on pharmacist perspectives of an adolescent health educational tool. 21 The open-ended questions asked about general knowledge and perceptions of adolescent vaping, feedback on a pharmacist-disseminated vaping educational tool, and the overall role of pharmacists in addressing adolescent vaping to adolescents and parents in their communities. The interview guide underwent multiple revisions and pilot testing by three study team members (JSL, TM, JP). 2.3 Participant recruitment &amp; eligibility criteria Ethical approval for this study was granted by the University of Wisconsin- Madison Minimal Risk Research Institutional Review Board in August 2022 (ID: 2022–1117). This study recruited a convenience sample of parents of adolescents aged 12 to 18 years, targeting parents of middle school and high school aged children. Participants were recruited from November 2022 to January 2023 through the research email listserv hosted by the university. Anyone affiliated with the university between the ages of 35 and 65 were contacted by this first recruitment email. A separate recruitment email was also sent to Wisconsin PATCH (Providers and Teens Communicating for Health), an adolescent health advocacy organization unaffiliated with the university. Eligible participants were required to have a child between the ages of 12 and 18 years, reside in Wisconsin, have English fluency, have access to the internet, and have access to a device that could use Zoom Video Communications. The use of e-cigarettes or risk of vaping was not a requirement for study participation. The recruitment email included a pre-screen Qualtrics online survey for parents of adolescents to fill out to ensure eligibility for the study and provide contact information for the investigators to schedule the interview. The research team did not have a prior relationship with any of the participants. 2.4 Data collection All study sessions were conducted virtually via Zoom at the time and location of the participant's choosing. Participants were asked to be in a private location, without the presence of others, during their interview sessions, and all complied. to One study team member (JSL) conducted all the virtual study sessions with the study participants, who were all made aware that she was a PhD student prior to their interviews with her. Each participant had their own session with the study team member to complete a semi-structured interview and a brief survey to collect demographic information. To gather feedback from on the Ph-EVER, the interviewer sent the participants a link to a PDF version of the handout so that participants could review it on their own devices for as long as they needed. The interviewer (JSL) wrote field notes during each interview to provide clarity and context to the data during analysis. Interviews were audio- and video-recorded via Zoom and transcribed verbatim for data analysis. Upon completion of interviews the study participant was sent a $30 Amazon e-gift card. No repeat interviews were conducted. 2.5 Data analysis All interviews were initially transcribed verbatim by one study team member (CK), though they were not returned to participants for comment or correction. Another study team member (VQ) checked the accuracy of the interview transcripts against the audio recordings and analyzed the data with thematic analysis using Dedoose software. An inductive approach was applied for thematic analysis of the interviews, where basic segments of texts were labeled with appropriate codes, then the codes were grouped into categories (or subthemes), which were finally grouped together again into main themes. Data saturation was reached with the interviews conducted. No participants provided feedback on the findings. Two additional study team members (OA, JSL) reviewed the themes and corresponding verbatim quotes generated from the analysis to validate the findings. 3 Results 3.1 Demographics A total of 46 parents participated in this study. The average age of participants was 45.8 years old (SD 4.09) with 80.4 % of individuals identifying as female and 82.6 % identifying as White/Caucasian. All participants had an education of an associate's degree or higher. Most participants were married or living as married (82.6 %) and had a household yearly income of $100,000 or more (80.4 %). The complete demographic information can be found in Table 1 . 3.2 Main themes The interview data was consistent with the findings of parent perspectives on the usefulness of Ph-EVER and the potential role of pharmacists in e-cigarette and vaping intervention. Five main themes were identified: (1) vaping knowledge, exposure and opinions, (2) Ph-EVER availability, feedback and usage, (3) parental and school role in vaping intervention, (4) receptiveness to learning about vaping, and (5) pharmacist role in vaping intervention. Each main theme consists of grouped subthemes, which are described under each theme. Additional quotes are listed verbatim by theme and subtheme in Table 2 . 3.3 Theme 1: vaping knowledge, exposure, and opinions Four subthemes were categorized together within Theme 1: comparison with smoking cigarettes, health consequences of vaping, adolescent vaping prevalence, and e-cigarette marketing towards adolescents. Before discussing the Ph-EVER, parents were asked about their prior knowledge on vaping and e-cigarettes. It appeared that parents had limited personal knowledge on vaping but believed vaping to have negative health consequences. For example, some parents spoke about how vaping damages organs of the body like the brain or lungs, while others commented on the potential addictive characteristics of these substances. “I guess I don't really- I don't know a lot [about vaping] other than, ‘don't do it, stay away from it.’ And that's about it.” – Parent 16. “I know [vaping is] addictive. I know that there's like, issues, there is something called popcorn lung that I've heard of, that some kids experienced after vaping.” – Parent 24. “I know [vaping] can harm the lung's breathing capacity. I think it can also harm brain development in kids.” – Parent 30. Additionally, parents often made comments suggesting similarities between vaping and smoking cigarettes. However, there were mixed opinions regarding whether vaping is better, worse, or equally damaging to one's health compared to cigarettes. Some additional responses from parents indicated that they were aware of various flavors and forms in vaping devices as well as the idea that vaping has become more popular among youth or targeted towards younger populations. Furthermore, when it comes to populations that vape, parents often responded that high school and middle school students were the main users of these devices, particularly in school settings. “[Vaping is] kind of taking the place of what would be cigarettes.” – Parent 44. “I guess you could say [vaping is] similar to cigarette smoke, maybe even worse.” – Parent 7. “I think [vaping] was, originally, in my mind, like, less problematic than smoking, it's still sort of holds that position.” – Parent 1. “It feels like there's a lot of marketing, specifically to this age group, which feels very cigarette-y back in the ‘80’s, how they're trying to market young kids with these flavors and trying to make them, you know, cute and sensitive, and like, just, yeah, it feels like, fun to do.” – Parent 23. “I don't know as much. I know that [vaping is] common between teenagers, because they think it's healthier than smoking.” – Parent 15. When parents were asked to describe how common they felt vaping occurs among adolescents in their local community, most parents often expressed that it was a common activity, but they rarely directly observed youth vaping themselves. Parents reported that they felt vaping has become more prevalent and accessible – some even expressing that family members or personal relationships play a role in vaping exposure for adolescents. When parents were asked to share their opinion on the issue of vaping among adolescents, most parents were concerned about the issue and disliked the idea of vaping in general. Other parents did not want their kids to smoke or vape but were not surprised that vaping is an issue among younger populations today. “I think [vaping], like, yeah, very common, almost everyone is doing it.” – Parent 17. “In my community, just listening to my kids, because I've never seen any of the kids vaping, but I have heard that it happens. I would say, just going off of that... I don't know, maybe twenty percent of our kids in my area are, are vaping. It seems to be a, a popular thing to do. I would say at least, yeah, maybe around twenty percent of them. I could believe that.” – Parent 26. “It's probably more common than I realize or see, because I, I don't, I definitely don't see it, or the, you know, teens I do know, it just doesn't feel like that, that's part of their world, so... but I did observe like, dropping off at a, homecoming dance and like, watching people filter in, and then seeing people just tuck off to the side, and they were probably vaping or smoking something. So, I know it's out there, but it's, it's more than I'm sure I'm aware of.” – Parent 20. “I think it's horrible. I think it's just- I mean, smoking, vaping, drinking, whatever. I mean, I constantly talk to [my child] about this. Just don't do that. Just don't make the choice to do that like, there's so many better things you can do in your life.” – Parent 25. 3.4 Theme 2: Ph-EVER availability, feedback and usage For the second theme, the following five subthemes were grouped together due to their focus on the Ph-EVER: availability, jargon, informative, useful resources and signs, and conversation starter. Parents suggested various options and formats for the information to be displayed and available to the community. Some common suggestions were in the form of online or social media posts, papers given concurrently with patient prescription bags, posters, video clips, school newsletters, and emails. Some less common formats that were suggested included brochures, mobile ads or games, MyChart messaging, business cards, and school orientation packets. The most common format suggested by parents to display and convey information from the handout was through online or social media platforms, such as Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and TikTok. When it came to locations where parents could envision the Ph-EVER shared, common places suggested included doctors' offices or clinics, schools, libraries, pharmacies, and public restrooms. Some less common suggested locations included community centers, grocery stores, bus stops, and gas stations. “Kids are on social media, like for everything. So, if there's a way to get [the Ph-EVER] out, in, you know, maybe it's a fun take, like, through TikTok, or Facebook, or Snapchat, and maybe get their attention without thinking that they're really going to learn something, and then it actually teaches something in the end.” – Parent 46. “Schools should have, could have this [Ph-EVER], you know, we have a weekly newsletter that gets sent out, you know, emailed out to all the parents, something like this just contained within that, that send, where it's not necessarily the child taking at home, but children should know about this and be shown that it's dangerous for them, but parents definitely need to know. So, I think there are a lot of methods that schools use now to communicate, rather than just like even physical flyers hanging up at the school, they can, they can send this kind of thing out.” – Parent 44. “Schools, pediatrician office, rehab center, I don't know... where else? The local health club, coffee shop. That's it.” – Parent 18. Most parents thought there were a few parts of the Ph-EVER that were difficult to understand or too overwhelming with information. Terms such as “propylene glycol” used in the infographic to describe contents within vaping devices posed challenges for parents as they were uncertain about its implications or identity in general. In terms of positive feedback, parents found the Ph-EVER to be informative and well-designed. In particular, parents found the “Resources for Quitting Vaping” and “Signs That Someone is Vaping” sections of the infographic to be most helpful. Overall, parents found the Ph-EVER easy to read, clear, and concise. “It was very easy to scan, I will say. And I understood everything.” – Parent 14. “I think it's colorful, eye-catching. I think there's some good information in here.” – Parent 23. “I liked the, the, the signs of somebody potentially vaping in your house, and then the resources there that are available that you could contact and reach out if you find out that you're- that you have a child that is vaping.” – Parent 16. “Here is a lot of information, so depending on where it's placed, people might not read it all.” – Parent 31. “There's a little bit too much content, like I ran out of steam toward the bottom.” – Parent 1. “You see, the thing about the nicotine salts and the propylene glycol, glycol? But I don't know what that means necessarily.” – Parent 19. Parents suggested various improvements to be made on Ph-EVER. Most comments suggested the addition of information, such as how vaping compared to cigarette smoking and more details on the health consequences of vaping. Some parents also advocated for information on the first steps towards helping someone who vapes. Others suggested additional statistics on the prevalence of vaping in various age groups and images of vaping devices for reference. Other suggestions included removal or redesign of certain areas of the infographic and simplification of its language. Parents suggested removal of content to declutter the page and make the information more easily digestible. Additionally, they suggested reformatting or adjusting the layout of the Ph-EVER to make information flow better. “I think there should be something here – maybe that might be good – is to compare vaping to smoking, because I think that there's this idea that it's better than smoking, and there should be some comparison either telling that, you know, some metrics, that's like, okay, ‘smoking does this, and vaping also does this.’” – Parent 24. “Additional mental health resources might be of, of value or of interest. You know, I don't know if one of the reasons kids vape is to help themselves cope with some anxiety or depression or things that are going on, but if they're kind of linked, then resources to help identify that or help to link to that would be good too.” – Parent 30. “You get a little specific about the – under the area that says “E-Cigarette Ingredients Most Damaging for Teens,“ and you list the actual ingredients. I don't know if people will relate to that as much, as opposed to, maybe, relate more of what the damage is.” – Parent 2. Most parents shared that they were likely to share the Ph-EVER along with its information to others. Parents indicated that the handout could serve as a great tool to bring up conversation with their adolescents and family members and help spread awareness about the consequences of vaping. “I think I'd use like, you know, show it like, ‘Hey, here are some of the risks, the signs of it.’ I would actually show it to my kids, as a way like, ‘Hey, this will help, you know, if your friend's doing it.’ Like, say, you know, like, ‘here's some symptoms.’ I liked the one at the bottom about how do you talk to your kids. There was actually some really good suggestions there.” – Parent 13. “It would equip me, like showing, like I said, those consequences, or how it- how I can relate it to him. He, he's big in sports, so I, you know, I would definitely focus on that. He loves basketball, and so, you know, vaping, smoking, anything isn't good for that. In his case, I would definitely talk about, you know, the, the mental health like, we – he takes medication, he takes Adderall – and I would say, you know, his goal is to get off of that, and if he's going to choose to do things like this, it's not going to get him off of that, it's going to make him need it more or make it worse, so I, you know, I would focus – sometimes, he gets real like, pissy about that subject, because he really, his goal is really to get off of his medication every – he's always like, ‘can we start cutting back?’ And I'm like, ‘oh, things aren't working too great right now.’ So, I would focus on that part of how it would impact his life.” – Parent 25. 3.5 Theme 3: parental and school role in vaping intervention Two subthemes were categorized together under Theme 3: role of parents and schools, and challenges with school vaping interventions. Parents often discussed the role of schools and parents in vaping intervention. Individuals indicated that parents and schools have a responsibility to be involved in vaping intervention and prevention. Parents expressed that early or prompt education about vaping would be a key factor in intervention. Additionally, they mentioned how vaping education could be incorporated into curriculum, such as in health class or educational sessions in schools to ensure that young students understand the consequences of vaping. Some also expressed various challenges faced by these groups to perform interventions. Parents talked about how getting the message across to youth is difficult in general, and school administrators are oftentimes oblivious to the issue since it is easy to hide vaping devices and activities. From a parent perspective, some felt that their child would likely not want to hear information from either parents or the schools and would end up disregarding their advice, especially as adolescents. “You can try to teach them as much as possible, and I think it's harder for parents in any situation, a kid, this kind of teen stage, you know, like what parents say, is kind of the last thing they want to hear, so it's kind of hard to get it across to them.” – Parent 46. “You know, like health classes, where they talk about sexual education and all, all that stuff, so [vaping] definitely should be part of that education. They, they have to be present for that, so maybe some of it will sink in.” – Parent 5. “Teachers and administrators are oftentimes oblivious to it because either they don't recognize what it looks like.” – Parent 9. 3.6 Theme 4: receptiveness to learning about vaping Theme 4 consisted of two subthemes grouped together: adolescents being either receptive or resistant to learning from a pharmacist. Most parents indicated that their adolescent children would be receptive to learning about vaping from a pharmacist. A small portion of parents indicated that their children would not be receptive or would only be receptive to learning from a pharmacist, depending on the relevance of the information to their personal life. “I will be okay. I think most of the people will be, will be okay, because it's like pharmacists are in the health, and then, it is giving some information about being more healthy for your family, and for you, and around the people, you know, I think it's probably acceptable.” – Parent 22. “If I went to them, because I felt like I had a need, or they had advertised, and I was curious, then, I think I would be open to that.” – Parent 43. “I would be open to it; I would be receptive. And I think one of the reasons I would be receptive is because I'm- I have kids in that age range.” – Parent 30. Most parents believed that their child would be receptive and respond positively to vaping education from a pharmacist as well. Parents believed that their child would likely engage with and listen to pharmacists better in comparison to themselves, as pharmacists appear as respected authority figures. However, some parents stated that their child may potentially be receptive to vaping education, and others simply shared that their child would not respond well. These parents felt that their child would simply not listen due to their maturity level at a young age or due to their child's lack of relationship or interaction with pharmacists in general. “I feel like, [my child] would respond to [vaping education from a pharmacist] better than a parent trying to shove it down their throat.” – Parent 46. “I think [my child would] be open. Probably about the same as a doctor. Again, I don't think kids and teenagers are seeking out the pharmacist, but I'm picturing, like, I'm going there for my flu shot, and they're reminding me of other important health things. So, like, they'd see them as a trusted health professional.” – Parent 10. “My kids don't usually go to the pharmacy with me. And I don't know that I see a ton of kids, my kids' age, you know, like, going to the pharmacy either. A lot of times, if those kids need something, it's either like, the parent is picking it up, or like, they're waiting in the car. So, I think they might be kind of weirded out, you know, because they haven't had that experience. Like, if they have gone, which it's been years since they've gone with me, I would say that they just kind of be like, ‘uh, okay, thanks.’ You know?” – Parent 29. 3.7 Theme 5: pharmacist role in vaping intervention Within Theme 5, focusing on the pharmacist's role, four subthemes were grouped together: limited role, target audience, accessibility, and seeking other health care professionals first on vaping education. Many parents commented that pharmacists have a limited ability to address vaping among youth. Parents specifically highlighted the idea that pharmacists are overworked, busy, and lack time to appropriately address vaping in the community setting. Additionally, some parents mentioned that there would be a lack of staffing in community pharmacies to handle the task. Another point parents conveyed was the idea that pharmacists typically have limited interactions or relationships with patients. Furthermore, parents also expressed that the pharmacists have fewer interactions with younger patients like adolescents and children compared with adults. Due to limited time and busy work settings, pharmacies typically have brief interactions with patients in general before moving on to their next tasks. Although parents expressed that pharmacists would have a limited ability to address vaping due to work settings and lack of strong relationships with patients, many felt that pharmacists serve as a public resource and are respected in their communities. Some parents perceived pharmacists as trustworthy and accessible health care professionals. However, some other parents shared that pharmacists would still not be the first resource they would use for education on vaping. Many parents were unaware that pharmacists could be a source of information on vaping to begin with. Furthermore, parents explained that their primary care doctors or other health care providers would likely be the first resources they would seek due to their stronger relationships or perceptions of these alternative roles. Parents had a variety of opinions on the potential for pharmacists to offer education about e-cigarettes and vaping. The most common critique was the idea that pharmacies would be an unrealistic setting to provide vaping education due to lack of time, staffing, and overall workflow in the pharmacy. Additionally, parents mentioned that the setting itself would not allow for appropriate privacy. As one parents describes: “I don't know how to get their [pharmacists'] perspective or their time on board adequately that could do… do it justice, and actually give the person the information they need in a very clear, concise way without having to be rushed. Because they're always like, rushing, so that's the only space I see them in, and it's always busy, and it feels like there's always – they're just not fully present, which makes it hard to have, I think, this kind of conversation. So yeah, so – because even when we were talking about, you know, places to put it in, I would never think pharmacy. It just wouldn't occur to me to get that kind of information from them.” – Parent 23. Additionally, many parents expressed there would be limited ability for pharmacists to educate on vaping if they lack strong relationships with patients. Some parents highlighted that there would be challenges in terms of educating the right audience or identifying individuals who specifically need this care. One main point was that adolescents rarely go to pharmacies, or the setting is out of reach for them. Since the issue of vaping surrounds adolescents, and most patients who come into pharmacies are adults and older adults, a different audience would potentially be targeted in most scenarios. However, some parents believed there was potential for pharmacist-provided vaping education. Parents suggested that pharmacists could try to host lectures or offer counseling on vaping during general medication consultations. Other suggestions also included appointment-based consultations on vaping education. Parents mentioned that vaping education in a community pharmacy setting could be more accessible due to the absence of copays and the absolute need for scheduled appointments, unlike in clinical settings. Parents expressed that they would be open to hearing education and advice from a pharmacist and may prefer it compared to a physician. Parents also often discussed how vaping education could occur in different settings outside of pharmacy. Most parents discussed the role of physicians in potentially offering vaping education and care. Specifically, parents suggested that they would most likely go to their child's pediatrician or primary care provider to receive advice regarding most health concerns. Alternatively, some parents discussed the role of non-health care professionals, such as teachers or social workers, in potentially providing vaping education as they may have stronger relationships with patients and adolescents. “I think [my son's] coaches in his sports would be the strongest voice. Maybe his health teacher at school, I don't know.” – Parent 21. “I think [teens are] more receptive to somebody they already have a relationship with, a teacher that they're close to, or the school social worker, or someone that they already know and interact with.” – Parent 18. 4 Discussion Many parents stated that they had limited personal knowledge on vaping and the use of e-cigarettes but believed partaking in these activities would lead to negative health consequences. Most parents viewed vaping and smoking cigarettes as similar or related activities, but parents were uncertain whether one was better, worse or equivalent to the other in terms of long-term effects. Also, parents perceived vaping to be common among adolescents, regardless of whether they directly observed youth vaping. Parents often mentioned how vaping has become an activity marketed towards younger populations, with adolescents as the primary users of these devices, particularly in school settings. This data further supports previous research highlighting the marketing of e-cigarettes towards adolescents as well as data that indicates the rising popularity of these substances among this age group. 4 , 5 , 9 Study findings showed that most parents lacked appropriate knowledge about vaping. However, the main points they were particularly concerned about were its harmful effects on health and the increasing use of these products among adolescents. This finding highlighted previous research that suggests challenges in parent understanding and knowledge about vaping but their general concern about its use in younger populations. 11 A structured infographic such as Ph-EVER may be useful in creating awareness about e-cigarette use and its associated health risks. Furthermore, it could provide a framework for parents to proactively create conversation with their children and discuss future directions at home. Upon reviewing Ph-EVER, most parents found the infographic to be informative and helpful especially in providing resources for support and helping parents identify signs of vaping in children. Parents provided valuable feedback on further improving the Ph-EVER educational tool regarding clarifying unfamiliar terminology and reducing the amount of information displayed. Nonetheless, most parents expressed that they would be likely to share the infographic and use it as a tool to start conversation with their children and family members. Parents suggested using the Ph-EVER tool in various formats and settings. The most common format parents mentioned to convey the information was via social media and online platforms such as Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and TikTok. These findings highlight the power of social media as a strong tool to reach a large audience. However, it also underscores the challenge that social media often contains information from potentially unreliable sources, which can hinder raising awareness effectively. 22 Nonetheless, it was apparent that most individuals preferred online platforms to display educational content and far less preferred options such as paper copies, handouts and physical cards or infographics. When asked to describe places where the infographic could be available, most parents responded that they would envision the infographic at doctor's offices or clinics. The second most popular location parents suggested was schools. These study results suggested that pharmacies may not be the only setting where parents can envision receiving vaping education. This finding was further emphasized when parents describe their thoughts on the role of pharmacists in vaping intervention and prevention. While many parents indicated that they would be receptive to learning about vaping from a pharmacist, many parents stated that pharmacists would not be the first person they would reach out for vaping education. Parents mentioned that they would most likely consult with a pediatrician for support. While parents viewed pharmacists as trustworthy, respectable and accessible professionals, they believed that pharmacists lack the appropriate time or resources to provide adequate education on vaping. Furthermore, they expressed that pharmacists typically lack strong relationships with patients, making it difficult to have appropriate and meaningful conversations on such a sensitive topic. Instead, many parents talked about the role of medical doctors, other health professionals and schools in providing vaping education to adolescents. This finding indicated that although patients find it easier to access pharmacies than doctor's offices and clinics, a lack of resources such as time makes it difficult to implement initiatives like vaping education in pharmacies. However, numerous parents' suggestions emphasized the potential for pharmacists to grow in this educational role focused on providing vaping prevention and cessation resources. Parents suggested that pharmacists could host lectures or have appointment-based consultations on vaping education. As noted in previous studies, pharmacists are among the most easily accessible health professionals, with patients visiting pharmacies nearly twice as often as primary care offices. 12 Given this, along with the rapid increase in adolescent vaping in recent years, pharmacists could become a key resource in addressing this issue. However, to achieve this, it is essential to dismantle the traditional view of pharmacists as solely medication dispensers and provide them with adequate resources and support to deliver meaningful vaping education to patients. 4.1 Future directions Future directions include modifying the Ph-EVER infographic based on participant suggestions. These updates would feature more information regarding the differences between cigarette smoking and vaping along with statistics to highlight the prevalence of vaping in various age groups. Other changes could include removal or simplification of the content contained in the infographic to increase readability. Upon additional refinement and revision of the Ph-EVER, future studies will include effectiveness trials for improvements in vaping risk-reducing behaviors among parents and adolescents as well as Ph-EVER implementation studies in different settings such as schools, clinics and community pharmacies. 4.2 Limitations The convenience sample of participants limits the generalizability and transferability of the findings to different populations. Participants were all from Wisconsin, predominantly White, female well-educated, and of higher household incomes, so findings may be more applicable to people with similar cultural or socioeconomic backgrounds. Future studies on the Ph-EVER will recruit participants from more diverse backgrounds and geolocations. Virtual interviews might have also limited the non-verbal cues and communication strength that could be better established with in-person interviews. Additionally, participants may have provided more socially desirable responses due to being recorded for the interviews. There are limitations as well when a qualitative research study is completed by a small team, so future qualitative studies for this intervention will intentionally include more researchers from diverse backgrounds to improve robustness in analysis, as well as reduce researcher bias in interpretation of data, to better validate findings. 5 Conclusion Findings indicate that most parents found Ph-EVER informative and potentially useful to initiate conversations about vaping in their households. However, most participants valued changes to its formatting or content to increase its usefulness and readability. Development and sharing of infographics such as Ph-EVER could increase awareness about vaping and its implications, especially for adolescents and young children. Furthermore, pH-EVER could serve as an aid for pharmacists and other providers to educate patients in an efficient, clear, and comprehensive manner. Given that pharmacists are among the most accessible health professionals in the United States, implementing these infographics in pharmacy settings could potentially help address e-cigarette use in communities. While this study showed that pharmacists may not be the first individuals that parents' approach for guidance on vaping education, the development of a vaping educational handout received positive feedback and was demonstrated to be helpful for parents. This further emphasizes the importance of having these tools available in general, as individuals may hesitate or lack time to seek care from health care providers directly. The Ph-EVER could become a useful and easily assessable tool for parents and be implemented by healthcare professionals as a resource. This study supports the use of Ph-EVER as a vaping educational tool and demonstrates the need for future studies on effectiveness and implementation of this intervention in pharmacies. CRediT authorship contribution statement Olufunmilola Abraham: Writing – review &amp; editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Virginia Quach: Writing – original draft, Formal analysis. Jenny S. Li: Writing – review &amp; editing, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Data curation, Conceptualization. Funding This work was supported by the 10.13039/100007015 University of Wisconsin-Madison , Office of the Provost, Ira and Ineva Reilly Baldwin Wisconsin Idea Endowment , Baldwin Wisconsin Idea Seed Grant. This project was also supported by a grant from the Community Pharmacy Foundation . Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. References 1 Birdsey J. Cornelius M. Jamal A. Tobacco product use among U.S. middle and high school students — National Youth Tobacco Survey, 2023 MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 72 44 2023 1173 1182 10.15585/mmwr.mm7244a1 37917558 PMC10629751 2 Livingston J.A. Chen C.H. Kwon M. Park E. Physical and mental health outcomes associated with adolescent E-cigarette use J Pediatr Nurs 64 2022 1 17 10.1016/j.pedn.2022.01.006 35121206 3 Jones K. Salzman G.A. The vaping epidemic in adolescents Mo Med 117 1 2020 56 58 32158051 PMC7023954 4 Farzal Z. Perry M.F. Yarbrough W.G. Kimple A.J. The adolescent vaping epidemic in the United States-how it happened and where we go from here JAMA Otolaryngol-Head Neck Surg 145 10 2019 885 886 10.1001/jamaoto.2019.2410 31436792 5 Miech R. Leventhal A. Johnston L. O’Malley P.M. Patrick M.E. Barrington-Trimis J. Trends in use and perceptions of nicotine vaping among US youth from 2017 to 2020 JAMA Pediatr 175 2 2021 185 190 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2020.5667 33320241 PMC7739194 6 Tobore TO On the potential harmful effects of E-cigarettes (EC) on the developing brain: the relationship between vaping-induced oxidative stress and adolescent/young adults social maladjustment J Adolesc 76 2019 202 209 10.1016/j.adolescence.2019.09.004 31574388 7 Thirión-Romero I. Pérez-Padilla R. Zabert G. Barrientos-Gutiérrez I. Respiratory impact of electronic cigarettes and low-risk tobacco Rev Investig Clin 71 1 2019 1409 10.24875/RIC.18002616 30810544 8 Chadi N. Li G. Cerda N. Weitzman E.R. Depressive symptoms and suicidality in adolescents using e-cigarettes and marijuana: a secondary data analysis from the youth risk behavior survey J Addict Med 13 5 2019 362 365 10.1097/ADM.0000000000000506 30688723 9 Selekman J. Vaping: it’s all a smokescreen Pediatr Nurs 45 1 2019 12 35 10. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (US) Office on Smoking and Health E-Cigarette Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General 2016 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US) Accessed August 1, 2024 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK538680/ 30869850 11 Patel M. Czaplicki L. Perks S.N. Parents’ awareness and perceptions of JUUL and other E-cigarettes Am J Prev Med 57 5 2019 695 699 10.1016/j.amepre.2019.06.012 31420121 12 Litvak I. Nguyen K. Pezzino N.C. Community pharmacists’ perceptions on their role in counseling patients on lifestyle modifications J Am Pharm Assoc 63 4S 2023 S57 S63.e2 10.1016/j.japh.2022.12.012 36621402 13 LeBovidge J.S. Herbert L.J. Ramos A. The development of age-based food allergy educational handouts for caregivers and patients: a work group report of the AAAAI adverse reactions to foods committee J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 10 10 2022 2552 2558 10.1016/j.jaip.2022.01.048 36030195 PMC9555009 14 Li J.S. Characterizing Parent and Adolescent Perspectives on E-Cigarette Use and the Role of Pharmacists in Addressing Youth Vaping. Dissertation Thesis 2024 University of Wisconsin-Madison 15. CDC About E-Cigarettes (Vapes). Smoking and Tobacco Use Accessed July 20, 2024 https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/e-cigarettes/about.html 2024 16. Ph.D KM. E-Cigarette Ingredients Pose Health Risks For Teens ConsumerSafety.org 2018 Accessed July 20, 2024 https://www.consumersafety.org/news/e-cigarette-ingredients-pose-health-risks-for-teens/ 17. CATCH My Breath Parent Toolkit – CATCH Accessed July 20, 2024 https://catch.org/rct-cmb-toolkit/ 2024 18. Vaping Dangers, Discussion With Teens Necessary Accessed July 20, 2024 https://www.beaumont.org/health-wellness/blogs/dangers-of-vaping 19. Quit Vaping | Smokefree Teen Accessed July 20, 2024 https://teen.smokefree.gov/quit-vaping 2024 20. This is Quitting Accessed July 20, 2024 https://truthinitiative.org/thisisquitting 2024 21 Abraham O. Slonac E. Paulsen Z. Pharmacists’ perspectives on MedSMA℞T: a serious game to educate youth about opioid safety J Am Pharm Assoc 63 4 2023 1087 1094.e1 10.1016/j.japh.2023.04.020 PMC10942740 37116795 22 Jafar Z. Quick J.D. Larson H.J. Social media for public health: reaping the benefits, mitigating the harms Health Promot Perspect 13 2 2023 105 112 10.34172/hpp.2023.13 37600540 PMC10439458 Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Tyler McCarthy and Dr. Joanne Peters for assisting with the interview guide revision. We would also like to thank Courtney Koeberl for assisting in transcribing of the interviews.