379 blackwellopen Early Intervention in Psychiatry Early Interv Psychiatry PMC12179817 12179817 12179817 40539376 10.1111/eip.70060 Bipolar Early Intervention Using New Digital Technologies (BLEND): A Pilot Randomised Controlled Trial of a Novel Blended‐Digital Early Intervention Model of Care for Youth With Bipolar Disorder I or II Ratheesh Aswin 1 2 3 ✉ Gates Jesse 2 4 5 Hammond Dylan 1 2 Shelton Clare 5 Macneil Craig 5 Hasty M Melissa 5 Dhar Arup 5 D'Alfonso Simon 6 Schmaal Lianne 1 2 Kessing Lars V 7 8 Gleeson John F 9 Davey Chris 10 Chanen Andrew 1 2 Murray Greg 11 Cotton Sue M 1 2 12 McGorry Patrick D 1 2 Berk Michael 13 Alvarez‐Jimenez Mario 1 2 1 Orygen, Parkville, Australia 2 Centre for Youth Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia 3 Discipline of Psychiatry and Mental Health, The University of New South, Sydney, Australia 4 School of Health and Biomedical Sciences, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia 5 Orygen Specialist Program, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia 6 School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia 7 Copenhagen Affective Disorders Research Center (CADIC), Psychiatric Center Copenhagen, Mental Health Services, Capital Region of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark 8 Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 9 Healthy Brain and Mind Research Centre, Australian Catholic University, Fitzroy, Australia 10 Department of Psychiatry, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia 11 Centre for Mental Health and Brain Sciences, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, Australia 12 School of Psychological Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Australia 13 Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation (IMPACT), Deakin University, Geelong, Australia * Correspondence: Aswin Ratheesh ( a.ratheesh@unsw.edu.au ) ✉ Corresponding author. 20 6 2025 19 6 e70060 e70060 21 6 2025 © 2025 The Author(s). Early Intervention in Psychiatry published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Australia, Ltd. This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes. ABSTRACT Background Despite evidence for early interventions for bipolar disorder (BD), there are relatively few accessible treatment models. We developed a digitally augmented model of care termed BLEND (BipoLar early interventions using New Digital technologies) which aims to improve mood symptoms in BD. BLEND includes: (a) guideline‐concordant pharmacotherapy; (b) in‐person psychological therapies blended with digital therapeutic content and (c) digital relapse monitoring. The aim of this study was twofold: (i) describe the acceptability, safety and feasibility of delivering BLEND and (ii) examine the feasibility of an efficacy trial of BLEND compared with enhanced standard care (ESC). Method We conducted a parallel‐group, open‐label, 2:1 randomised pilot trial within a youth mental‐health outpatient service in Melbourne, Australia. We included youth aged 15–25 years with BD I or II, who had not previously accessed multidisciplinary care. All participants received similar background care. BLEND differed from ESC in having manualised blended digital and in‐person psychological therapies and digital relapse monitoring. Results We randomised 21 young people over a 12‐month recruitment period, predominantly female participants (71.4%) with BD Type II (85.7%). Both treatment models were acceptable and safe, but the BLEND group had greater reductions in suicidal ideation. Among components of BLEND, in‐person psychological therapy and psychopharmacological interventions could be delivered with fidelity. Digital therapy engagement was high, but participants used digital relapse monitoring variably. Conclusions The BLEND model was safe and acceptable and may lead to improvements in suicidality compared with ESC. Concordant with the aims of a pilot study, there is scope for the content to be rationalised based on feedback to improve feasibility of the digital therapy. Relapse monitoring may usefully be extended to depressive symptoms. The next step is to confirm the efficacy of BLEND compared with standard care. Keywords: bipolar disorder, depression, early medical intervention, mania, mental health, pilot projects, psychiatry status released display-pdf yes is-in-collection-domain yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Revised 2025 Apr 17; Received 2024 Oct 29; Accepted 2025 May 30; Issue date 2025 Jun. 1. Introduction Early intervention for bipolar disorder (BD) has the potential to improve short‐ to medium‐term outcomes (Ratheesh et al. 2023 ). In the early course of BD, care in a specialised mood disorder clinic was associated with fewer hospitalisations and improved patient satisfaction (Kessing et al. 2013 ), especially in youth (Kessing et al. 2014 ). The high proportion of those with BD experiencing youth onset (Geoffroy et al. 2013 ) and the higher mortality in youth or soon after diagnosis (Osby et al. 2001 ) suggest that young people need access to effective early intervention models. In such models, there is strong support for combining evidence‐based psychological therapies with medications in acute treatment and prevention of recurrences in BD (Malhi et al. 2021 ). In addition, education regarding early warning signs (Perry et al. 1999 ), self‐monitoring of symptoms (Goodday et al. 2020 ) and embedding clinician monitoring of self‐rated symptoms (Faurholt‐Jepsen et al. 2020 , 2015 ) have shown promise in preventing relapses. Combining these interventions in multi‐component early‐intervention packages could be beneficial, akin to early treatment programmes for psychosis (McGorry et al. 1996 ; Kane et al. 2016 ). In developing such models, we have been strongly motivated to include digital intervention delivery given the reach of digital technologies (Murray 2019 ) and the preferences of consumers (Gates et al. 2023 ). We utilised an innovative Australian digital intervention platform using moderated online social therapy (MOST; https://www.most.org.au/ ) as well as therapeutic content which has shown promise for youth with early psychosis (Alvarez‐Jimenez et al. 2021 , 2018 ; Engel et al. 2023 ), depression and anxiety (Rice et al. 2018 ; Alvarez‐Jimenez et al. 2020 ). BipoLar Early intervention using New Digital technologies (BLEND) is a 6‐month, multicomponent, blended digital model of care designed to improve the course of mood symptoms for youth in the early course of BD. This model combines: (i) psychological therapy for BD delivered through in‐person individual therapy blended with digital intervention content; (ii) guideline and evidence‐based pharmacotherapies for acute and maintenance treatment of BD; as well as (iii) a digitally supported relapse monitoring strategy. Psychological therapy for in‐person individual sessions was a manualised, cognitive behaviourally informed therapy (Macneil et al. 2012 ; Cotton et al. 2019 ) for BD. We also delivered BD‐specific digital psychological therapy content including psychoeducation (Macneil et al. 2012 ) and social rhythm therapy (SRT) (Crowe et al. 2020 ) designed to be delivered in a blended manner (Erbe et al. 2017 ) with in‐person sessions. Pharmacotherapies utilised in BLEND were selected from clinical guidelines for BD (Malhi et al. 2021 ). Finally, our digitally supported relapse monitoring strategy utilised established approaches to participants' self‐monitoring of their symptoms, with elevated scores triggering a clinical response (Goodday et al. 2020 ). In this study, we aimed to describe the feasibility of delivering the BLEND components, as well as their acceptability and safety compared with an enhanced version of routine clinical care. Secondarily, we aimed to describe the feasibility of conducting an adequately powered efficacy trial and to describe changes in mood symptoms in both groups. 2. Methods 2.1. Design We conducted a single site, open, parallel group, pilot 2:1 randomised controlled trial comparing BLEND with Enhanced Standard Care from May 2021 till July 2023, with a 6‐month intervention period and a further 6‐month follow‐up. This study was approved by a University of Melbourne ethics committee (STEMM2 2020‐14536‐12961‐2) and registered with the Australian and New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ACTRN12621001123831). This report adheres to the CONSORT Statement for pilot and feasibility trials (Eldridge et al. 2016 ) (Table S1 ). 2.2. Setting The study was conducted at Orygen, a youth mental health service for young people aged 15–25 years in metropolitan Melbourne, Australia. The service receives referrals for young people with suspected BD from general practitioners, primary care youth mental health services (headspace centres (Rickwood et al. 2019 )) and an affiliated tertiary youth mental health intake service. An experienced psychiatrist (A.R., A.D.) confirmed the clinical diagnosis of BD before young people were considered eligible for the trial. 2.3. Participants We included consenting participants aged 15–25 years of age (inclusive), with a diagnosis of BD I or II based on the MINI International Neuropsychiatric Interview (Sheehan et al. 1998 ) (V 7.0.2) for DSM‐5. We excluded those who were expected to require acute or involuntary mental health treatment for severity or suicidality. We also excluded those who had previously received 6 months or more of multidisciplinary intervention for BD or psychosis to ensure focus on early intervention. Those currently experiencing nonpsychotic manic or hypomanic episodes were reconsidered for eligibility after treatment. We excluded those with an intellectual disability or inability to converse in English, which could interfere with engagement with study materials and study participation. 2.4. Interventions Participants in both groups received psychopharmacological interventions, psychological therapies, peer support and access to digital interventions (Table 1 ). All participants had access to a purpose‐built version of the aforementioned MOST platform (Blend.MOST) where a peer worker with lived experience of BD moderated participants' posts, facilitated online social networking and offered individual support. Participants could also access needs‐based support including vocational help and liaison with school or family. 2.4.1. Enhanced Standard Clinical Care (ESC) ESC was designed to represent clinical care in the community. ESC participants received psychological therapies targeting their current needs. Psychopharmacological and psychological care was expected to be delivered through available clinicians, as would happen in routine care. All participants had access to MOST therapy journeys targeting depression, anxiety, social functioning and other supportive content (not specific to BD). 2.4.2. BLEND Participants in the BLEND group received three unique intervention components, not available in ESC: 2.4.2.1. Blended Psychological Therapy Blended psychological therapy entailed a purpose‐built integration of face‐to‐face therapy sessions with bipolar‐specific digital content delivered through Blend. MOST. A trained clinical psychologist (J.G., C.S.) provided CBT‐informed (Macneil et al. 2012 ), manualised individual therapy. The intervention was designed to be delivered over 10–15 sessions (details in Supporting Information ). Therapists on‐boarded participants to the BLEND‐specific sections of Blend.MOST, monitored their engagement and modified their access to digital therapy content depending on current mental state and progress with individual therapy. Digital therapy content (Table 1 ) was informed by the manualised individual therapy (Cotton et al. 2019 ), as well as social rhythm components of Interpersonal and Social Rhythms Therapy (Frank et al. 2000 ). Digital content included small individual ‘activities’, designed to be completed in a short timeframe. Activities comprised a variety of formats (e.g., comics, ‘reflective actions’, ‘regular actions’). Order of activities was fixed for participants; however, therapists could alter pathways based on participant need and relevance to in‐person therapy. Fidelity to BLEND psychological interventions was maintained through regular supervision, trial manuals and completion of a fidelity checklist breaking down each module of therapy into component steps. 2.4.2.2. Psychopharmacological Interventions Participants received an initial assessment as well as monitoring of mental state, medication effects, risks and treatment planning in three to four psychiatrist appointments. Psychiatrists (A.R., A.D.) recommended evidence‐based interventions for acute treatment and prevention of mood episodes based on the Australian guidelines for mood disorders (Malhi et al. 2021 ) and a meta‐review of guidelines (Chia et al. 2019 ). Medications were offered using shared decision‐making principles (Thomas et al. 2021 ), without explicit decision support tools. 2.4.2.3. Digitally Enhanced Relapse Monitoring Digitally enhanced relapse monitoring was embedded within Blend.MOST, where young people were asked to complete the Altman Self‐Rating Mania (ASRM) scale (Altman et al. 1997 ) weekly informed by prior literature (Goodday et al. 2020 ; Simon et al. 2017 ; Miklowitz et al. 2012 ). Weekly automated surveys were activated on participants' Blend.MOST homepage after this was introduced by their therapist. SMS reminders were utilised to improve uptake of self‐monitoring. Participant responses were monitored by clinicians on Blend.MOST, with ASRM ratings (≥ 6) or requests for additional support triggering contact from a clinician. While we did not monitor for depressive symptoms due to the possibility that repeated monitoring may be associated with a worse depressive course of illness (Faurholt‐Jepsen et al. 2015 , 2020 ), we asked participants to rate a question regarding their need for additional care. 2.5. Randomisation and Blinding Participants were randomised to BLEND or ESC in a 2:1 design to gain more experience with BLEND. We expected to randomise approximately 20 participants within a 12‐month recruitment period based on referral numbers. Randomisation was based on permutated block randomisation with stratification for sex. Allocation sequence was generated online, with assignment independent of researchers. Trained research assistants enrolled participants and conducted assessments but were not blinded to group assignment due to the requirement to access medical records. 2.6. Outcomes and Measures 2.6.1. Primary Outcomes Primary outcomes were feasibility, acceptability and safety of BLEND and ESC models, determined at 6 months. Feasibility of delivering BLEND was operationalised in session attendance (number), completion of online activities (number and proportion) and digital relapse monitoring (proportion of weeks completed). Acceptability was determined by: (a) qualitative interviews focused on affective attitudes and burden of interventions (Sekhon et al. 2017 ); (b) engagement, measured using three items relating to ‘involvement with treatment’ from an engagement measure (Gillespie et al. 2004 ) and (c) usage data from the MOST platform (e.g., activity completion, posts and reacts). Safety was determined based on number, type and severity of adverse events (AEs) reported during the trial and suicidality based on the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C‐SSRS) administered at baseline, 3 and 6 months (Posner et al. 2011 ). 2.6.2. Secondary Outcome The secondary outcome of determining the feasibility of progressing to an efficacy trial was based on: (a) recruitment of at least 20 participants within the 12‐month recruitment window and (b) completion of BLEND intervention components at adequate fidelity. Adequate fidelity of pharmacological interventions was defined as having received at least two sessions with a psychiatrist; in‐person psychological therapy as having received at least 8 CBT sessions and digital psychological therapy content as having completed 50% of eligible activities and digital relapse monitoring completion in at least 50% of the eligible weeks. 2.6.3. Exploratory Outcomes Treatment effects on mood symptoms were explored using the Longitudinal Interval Follow‐up Evaluation (LIFE (Keller et al. 1987 )), conducted at baseline, 3 and 6 months. Participants' (hypo)manic and depressive symptoms in each of the preceding 12 weeks were rated using psychiatric status rating (PSR) scales. The course of mood symptoms was examined using the cumulative number of weeks with threshold (PSR ≥ 5 or more) depressive, (hypo)manic or any mood episode (and subthreshold episodes, PSR ≥ 4) in the preceding 12 weeks (Goldstein et al. 2023 ). Finally, we measured participants self‐reported quality of life using the Assessment of Quality of Life‐8 Domain instrument (AQoL (Richardson and Iezzi 2011 )) and functioning using the Social and Occupational Functioning Assessment Scale (SOFAS) (Goldman et al. 1992 ). 2.7. Analysis We described participant recruitment and feasibility of delivering interventions at an adequate fidelity; safety of participants and acceptability of interventions in BLEND and ESC arms. A content analysis approach was used to analyse qualitative interview data for acceptability (Elo and Kyngas 2008 ). We compared quantitative data for participants in BLEND and ESC arms at baseline, using mean differences and odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals. We explored changes in the course of mood symptoms (LIFE), suicidality (C‐SSRS), engagement, functioning (SOFAS) and quality of life (AQoL) from baseline to 6‐months across BLEND and ESC arms using mean differences, standardised mean differences and ORs between groups using linear mixed effects regressions with random intercept only and fixed effects for time and a time:treatment interaction. All analyses were completed using R (version 4.3.0) including packages lme4 (version 1.1.33 (Bates et al. 2015 )) and lmerTest (version 3.1.3 (Kuznetsova et al. 2017 )). 3. Results 3.1. Participant Description During the 12‐month recruitment period (15 June 2021 to 6 July 2022), we randomised 21 of 38 eligible participants (Figure 1 ). Rates of attrition were similar across treatment arms, with two participants in BLEND and one in ESC lost to follow‐up by 6 months. The sample of 21 was predominantly female (71.4%) with a mean age of 20 years (SD = 2.19). Four (19.0%) participants were born outside of Australia (Table 2 ). At baseline, BLEND participants were more likely to report a previous suicide attempt and had a greater proportion of time in depressive episodes over the previous 12 weeks. Additionally, the BLEND arm had a lower proportion of BD Type I participants. 3.2. Feasibility of Treatment Delivery 3.2.1. Blended Psychological Therapy Of the 13 participants who received the BLEND intervention, all received individual psychological therapy covering engagement, formulation and psychoeducation. Eleven participants (85%) completed modules focused on SRT and BD‐specific content. Nine participants (64.3%) completed a module targeting relapse prevention. In all sessions, the therapists engaged with participants regarding digital therapy content (‘blending’). Regarding digital therapy, participants tended to complete most of the initial psychoeducational material in Understanding Bipolar (Table 3 ) with half the group completing more than 98% of the content (IQR = 77.8, 100.0). A lower proportion (61.6%, IQR = 19.8, 85.5) completed SRT focused Rhythms and Balance. While many participants did not complete the third journey (Preparing for the Future) by the 6‐month time point, most completed all content between 6 and 9 months (Figure 2 ; see also Table S4 for details on time till starting each module). While BLEND participants completed activities from a range of topics (e.g., socialising, self‐confidence, anxiety and depression) in addition to the BD‐specific content, those in ESC only completed activities from the depression‐focused MOST content. All BLEND participants completed at least one MOST activity, while only two (28.6%) ESC participants completed any MOST activities and neither completed more than 50% of the activities within the journey. Online social network engagement did not differ substantially between groups (Table S2 ). 3.2.2. Psychopharmacological Interventions Most participants received two or more psychiatrist sessions and interventions were similar in the two arms (Table 3 ). Prescribed medications were similar across groups, with antidepressants, lamotrigine and lurasidone the most commonly selected medications. The median duration of adherence with these medications were 32–40 days for Lamotrigine and 28–30 days for Lurasidone. 3.2.3. Digital Relapse Monitoring All 14 BLEND participants received BD‐specific digital relapse monitoring, with 11 (78.6%) responding to at least one weekly survey. Overall survey response was moderate (36%) with high variability (range = 0%–91.7%). Nine (64.3%) and three (21.4%) participants triggered alerts at least once for high mood and additional support, respectively. 3.3. Acceptability Participants reported high levels of involvement with treatment at baseline (Table 2 ) and engagement improved slightly over time without substantial group differences (Table 5 ). Themes from qualitative data relating to the acceptability of BLEND and its components were divided into those deemed ‘helpful’ and those that were ‘unhelpful or needs improvement’ as summarised in Table 4 . Participant experiences were reflective of benefits relating to blended intervention delivery, accessibility to care and availability of multiple treatment components, particularly psychological therapy. Specific areas for improvement related to the burden of both digital therapeutic content and digital relapse monitoring. 3.4. Safety The prevalence of AEs was similar across BLEND (moderate = 8; severe = 4) and ESC (moderate = 4; severe = 6, Table S3 ). The most common AEs were suicidality‐related. All severe and serious AEs were unrelated to the intervention/trial. There were three AEs of minor severity in the BLEND arm found to be definitely related to the intervention/trial, including distress following an assessment and side‐effects of lurasidone (nausea and agitation). No participant had to be discontinued from the study intervention during the 6‐month period. While the intensity of suicidal ideation decreased from baseline in the BLEND arm, it increased in ESC, with this interaction significant even when adjusting for baseline differences on C‐SSRS (Table 5 , β = −1.57, 95% CI = −2.95, −0.20). 3.5. Exploratory Outcomes Weeks spent in a depressed mood episode, as well as any mood episode, in the prior 3 months decreased more in BLEND relative to ESC (Table 5 ); however, when controlling for baseline differences, differences between treatment arms were not significant. Quality of life tended to improve in both treatment arms, though more in the ESC group ( β = −0.26, 95% CI = −0.39, −0.12). Notably, a moderate proportion (2, 33.3%) of those in the ESC arm reported clinically significant hypomanic symptoms (PSR ≥ 4) in the 2 weeks prior to the 6‐month assessment time point. At 12 months, gains in functioning were maintained in both treatment arms (Table S6 ). 4. Discussion In the first randomised pilot evaluation of an early intervention model of care for youth with nonpsychotic BDs, we identified that the overall model was feasible, safe and acceptable. The BLEND group had greater improvements in suicidality compared with those receiving ESC. Regarding the feasibility of BLEND components, (i) in‐person and blended psychological therapy was delivered as planned; (ii) digital psychological therapy content was partially completed at 6 months but largely completed by 9 months; (iii) guideline‐concordant pharmacotherapy was feasible although medications were only continued for short periods and (iv) digitally enhanced relapse monitoring had limited regular completion. The feasibility of CBT‐focused individual psychological therapy is consistent with previous experience in young people with BD (Macneil et al. 2012 ). Blended treatment delivery with therapist interventions is likely to have substantially increased engagement with online content compared with the ESC group and is consistent with data from adults with depression (Krieger et al. 2023 ). Likewise, for in‐person therapy, while participants were offered the same number of appointments in both arms, attendance rates for those in ESC were lower than expected but broadly in line with Australian norms for similar settings (Seidler et al. 2020 ). The lower number of sessions in ESC compared to BLEND may point to improved acceptability or greater adherence to model fidelity within the BLEND model of care. Qualitative data was also strongly supportive of blended delivery of psychological therapy content, which may help overcome barriers in adoption and longer‐term use of digital therapies for serious mental disorders (Erbe et al. 2017 ). Several young people observed there was too much reading and that some content could be repetitive, providing scope for content refinement. Despite differences in appointment attendance, as well as digital content completion, involvement with treatment as per the engagement metric, EM‐ITS, was high and improved in both arms. Digital therapy content was acceptable to youth in early illness course, as most participants completed online content by 9–12 months. While there was a large volume of therapeutic content requiring completion over 6 months, most participants completed two therapy journeys, equivalent to 10 therapy ‘modules’ (&gt; 60 activities), which is substantially greater than that in other trials without therapist blending (Rice et al. 2018 ). The burden associated with different treatment components could also explain the relatively low compliance with weekly online mood monitoring. Population‐specific factors may also have contributed, as adolescents tend to adhere less to interventions (Taddeo et al. 2008 ). Their early illness course and a relative absence of severe prior manic episodes may also mean they are less invested in relapse monitoring. Prior data suggests greater illness severity is associated with higher adherence to electronic self‐monitoring in BD (Ortiz et al. 2023 ). The medication adherence was relatively low among our participants, with the median time to discontinuation of approximately 1 month. This likely indicates young people exploring different medications within a shared decision‐making framework to find medications optimal for them. Alternatively, this may point to a lower benefit–risk balance of medications when the episodes are less severe. Pharmacological interventions utilised (e.g., Lamotrigine, Lurasidone and antidepressants) likely reflect the depressive burden of BD within our sample, consistent with the early course of BD (Etain et al. 2012 ) and the BD II predominance. Given the shared decision‐making paradigm employed in psychiatric interventions, the use of these medications also likely reflects their greater tolerability profile relative to other medications (e.g., atypical antipsychotics), particularly, with regard to weight gain and the over‐representation of women/girls in our sample, for whom weight may be a major concern (Utter et al. 2012 ) and alternative medications may be less tolerable (Barbui et al. 2005 ). Finally, while all BLEND participants utilised a mood stabiliser at least once during the trial, three of seven ESC participants did not. This difference may be an artefact related to small sample size. Alternatively, patterns of medication utilisation may reflect that evidence‐based interventions within BLEND support one another (e.g., psychoeducation in psychological therapy supporting psychopharmacology), leading to better implementation. The main limitation of this study included an underrepresentation of males, although the high proportion of females in our sample may reflect the unmet treatment need for BD (Dell'Osso et al. 2021 ) or gender differences in help‐seeking (Moller‐Leimkuhler 2002 ). The small sample size and single‐site recruitment also limit confidence in quantitative comparisons between groups and generalisability. A future, adequately powered efficacy trial is necessary to confirm the relative efficacy of BLEND compared with standard care. Such a trial is likely to be feasible with respect to recruitment in current or similar settings, although interventions may need modifications. Current results suggest several adaptations for future studies, as well as the model of care itself. In future adaptations, digital content could be rationalised, including fewer activities given the recommendations for brevity in youth digital mental health interventions (Lattie et al. 2022 ). Despite this, the high retention of participants in digital therapy over 9–12 months is a significant advance in digital mental health care and could aid in relapse prevention in BD. The relatively short duration of medication use may also indicate the need for a greater focus on adherence in future trials. Additional use of fidelity checklists may help with future trial and health service implementation. Delineating the contribution of each component of the treatment model to overall effectiveness requires adequate sample size; measurement of all planned and unplanned interventions, as well as feasibility and fidelity of implementing components of ESC in addition to BLEND. Finally, digital relapse prevention efforts utilising regular surveys of elevated mood could be expanded to include assessment of depressed energy and affect. While we had been cautious to include these in the current trial given results from previous studies suggesting repeated surveys may worsen depressed mood, these results were based on subanalyses rather than intention‐to‐treat analyses (Faurholt‐Jepsen et al. 2020 , 2015 ) and qualitative feedback in our own sample suggests some monitoring of these symptoms may be helpful. Broadly, the current study suggests the feasibility of digitally enhanced and specialised treatment models in early intervention for BD and supports the need for future definitive efficacy studies. Conflicts of Interest L.V.K. has, within the last 3 years, been a consultant for Teva and Lundbeck. Supporting information Data S1. Supporting Information. Acknowledgements We are grateful to Dr. James Kean for study support, Ms. Yuzhe Zheng for clinical support and Ms. Jessy Smith for advice in the adaptation of interventions. We wish to acknowledge all young people and their families for study participation. Open access publishing facilitated by The University of Melbourne, as part of the Wiley ‐ The University of Melbourne agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians. Ratheesh, A. , Gates J., Hammond D., et al. 2025. “Bipolar Early Intervention Using New Digital Technologies (BLEND): A Pilot Randomised Controlled Trial of a Novel Blended‐Digital Early Intervention Model of Care for Youth With Bipolar Disorder I or II.” Early Intervention in Psychiatry 19, no. 6: e70060. 10.1111/eip.70060. Funding: This work was supported by the Hearts and Minds Investments, Collie Foundation and E.H. and Marion Flack Trust. Additionally, A.R. received salary support from the National Health and Medical Research Council. The funders did not have any involvement in the conception of the study, analysis or preparation of this report. Data Availability Statement Data will potentially be available to researchers from not‐for profit organisations, commercial organisations or others based in any location. All data requests will be considered by the data custodian and the primary sponsor on a case‐by‐case basis. Requests must include a methodologically sound proposal. Specific conditions of use may apply and will be specified in a data sharing agreement (or similar) that the requester must agree to before access is granted. For further information, see Orygen data management policy. References Altman, E. G. , Hedeker D., Peterson J. L., and Davis J. M.. 1997. “The Altman Self‐Rating Mania Scale.” Biological Psychiatry 42, no. 10: 948–955. Alvarez‐Jimenez, M. , Gleeson J. F., Bendall S., et al. 2018. “Enhancing Social Functioning in Young People at Ultra High Risk (UHR) for Psychosis: A Pilot Study of a Novel Strengths and Mindfulness‐Based Online Social Therapy.” Schizophrenia Research 202: 369–377. Alvarez‐Jimenez, M. , Koval P., Schmaal L., et al. 2021. “The Horyzons Project: A Randomized Controlled Trial of a Novel Online Social Therapy to Maintain Treatment Effects From Specialist First‐Episode Psychosis Services.” World Psychiatry 20, no. 2: 233–243. Alvarez‐Jimenez, M. , Rice S., D'Alfonso S., et al. 2020. “A Novel Multimodal Digital Service (Moderated Online Social Therapy+) for Help‐Seeking Young People Experiencing Mental Ill‐Health: Pilot Evaluation Within a National Youth E‐Mental Health Service.” Journal of Medical Internet Research 22, no. 8: e17155. Barbui, C. , Nosè M., Bindman J., et al. 2005. “Sex Differences in the Subjective Tolerability of Antipsychotic Drugs.” Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 25, no. 6: 521–526. Bates, D. , Mächler M., Bolker B., and Walker S.. 2015. “Fitting Linear Mixed‐Effects Models Using lme4.” Journal of Statistical Software 67, no. 1: 1–48. Chia, M. F. , Cotton S., Filia K., et al. 2019. “Early Intervention for Bipolar Disorder—Do Current Treatment Guidelines Provide Recommendations for the Early Stages of the Disorder?” Journal of Affective Disorders 257: 669–677. Cotton, S. M. , Berk M., Jackson H., et al. 2019. “Improving Functional Outcomes in Early‐Stage Bipolar Disorder: The Protocol for the REsearch Into COgnitive and Behavioural VERsatility Trial.” Early Intervention in Psychiatry 13, no. 6: 1470–1479. Crowe, M. , Inder M., Swartz H. A., Murray G., and Porter R.. 2020. “Social Rhythm Therapy—A Potentially Translatable Psychosocial Intervention for Bipolar Disorder.” Bipolar Disorders 22, no. 2: 121–127. Dell'Osso, B. , Cafaro R., and Ketter T. A.. 2021. “Has Bipolar Disorder Become a Predominantly Female Gender Related Condition? Analysis of Recently Published Large Sample Studies.” International Journal of Bipolar Disorders 9, no. 1: 3. Eldridge, S. M. , Chan C. L., Campbell M. J., et al. 2016. “CONSORT 2010 Statement: Extension to Randomised Pilot and Feasibility Trials.” BMJ 355: i5239. Elo, S. , and Kyngas H.. 2008. “The Qualitative Content Analysis Process.” Journal of Advanced Nursing 62, no. 1: 107–115. Engel, L. , Alvarez‐Jimenez M., Cagliarini D., et al. 2023. “The Cost‐Effectiveness of a Novel Online Social Therapy to Maintain Treatment Effects From First‐Episode Psychosis Services: Results From the Horyzons Randomized Controlled Trial.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 50: 427–436. Erbe, D. , Eichert H. C., Riper H., and Ebert D. D.. 2017. “Blending Face‐To‐Face and Internet‐Based Interventions for the Treatment of Mental Disorders in Adults: Systematic Review.” Journal of Medical Internet Research 19, no. 9: e306. Etain, B. , Lajnef M., Bellivier F., et al. 2012. “Clinical Expression of Bipolar Disorder Type I as a Function of Age and Polarity at Onset: Convergent Findings in Samples From France and the United States.” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 73, no. 4: e561–e566. Faurholt‐Jepsen, M. , Frost M., Christensen E. M., Bardram J. E., Vinberg M., and Kessing L. V.. 2020. “The Effect of Smartphone‐Based Monitoring on Illness Activity in Bipolar Disorder: The MONARCA II Randomized Controlled Single‐Blinded Trial.” Psychological Medicine 50, no. 5: 838–848. Faurholt‐Jepsen, M. , Frost M., Ritz C., et al. 2015. “Daily Electronic Self‐Monitoring in Bipolar Disorder Using Smartphones—The MONARCA I Trial: A Randomized, Placebo‐Controlled, Single‐Blind, Parallel Group Trial.” Psychological Medicine 45, no. 13: 2691–2704. Frank, E. , Swartz H. A., and Kupfer D. J.. 2000. “Interpersonal and Social Rhythm Therapy: Managing the Chaos of Bipolar Disorder.” Biological Psychiatry 48, no. 6: 593–604. Gates, J. , Bendall S., Tremain H., et al. 2023. “What Do Australian Consumers With Lived Experience of Bipolar Disorder Want From Early Intervention Services?” Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 58, no. 3: 280–283. Geoffroy, P. A. , Etain B., Scott J., et al. 2013. “Reconsideration of Bipolar Disorder as a Developmental Disorder: Importance of the Time of Onset.” Journal of Physiology 107, no. 4: 278–285. Gillespie, M. , Smith J., Meaden A., Jones C., and Wane J.. 2004. “Clients' Engagement With Assertive Outreach Services: A Comparison of Client and Staff Perceptions of Engagement and Its Impact on Later Engagement.” Journal of Mental Health 13, no. 5: 439–452. Goldman, H. H. , Skodol A. E., and Lave T. R.. 1992. “Revising Axis V for DSM‐IV: A Review of Measures of Social Functioning.” American Journal of Psychiatry 149: 1148–1156. Goldstein, T. R. , Merranko J., Rode N., et al. 2023. “Dialectical Behavior Therapy for Adolescents With Bipolar Disorder: A Randomized Clinical Trial.” JAMA Psychiatry 81, no. 1: 15–24. Goodday, S. M. , Atkinson L., Goodwin G., et al. 2020. “The True Colours Remote Symptom Monitoring System: A Decade of Evolution.” Journal of Medical Internet Research 22, no. 1: e15188. Kane, J. M. , Robinson D. G., Schooler N. R., et al. 2016. “Comprehensive Versus Usual Community Care for First‐Episode Psychosis: 2‐Year Outcomes From the NIMH RAISE Early Treatment Program.” American Journal of Psychiatry 173, no. 4: 362–372. Keller, M. B. , Lavori P. W., Friedman B., et al. 1987. “The Longitudinal Interval Follow‐Up Evaluation. A Comprehensive Method for Assessing Outcome in Prospective Longitudinal Studies.” Archives of General Psychiatry 44, no. 6: 540–548. Kessing, L. V. , Hansen H. V., Christensen E. M., Dam H., Gluud C., and Wetterslev J.. 2014. “Do Young Adults With Bipolar Disorder Benefit From Early Intervention?” Journal of Affective Disorders 152–154: 403–408. Kessing, L. V. , Hansen H. V., Hvenegaard A., et al. 2013. “Treatment in a Specialised Out‐Patient Mood Disorder Clinic v. Standard Out‐Patient Treatment in the Early Course of Bipolar Disorder: Randomised Clinical Trial.” British Journal of Psychiatry 202, no. 3: 212–219. Krieger, T. , Bur O. T., Weber L., et al. 2023. “Human Contact in Internet‐Based Interventions for Depression: A Pre‐Registered Replication and Meta‐Analysis of Randomized Trials.” Internet Interventions 32: 100617. Kuznetsova, A. , Brockhoff P. B., and Christensen R. H. B.. 2017. “lmerTest Package: Tests in Linear Mixed Effects Models.” Journal of Statistical Software 82, no. 13: 1–26. Lattie, E. G. , Stiles‐Shields C., and Graham A. K.. 2022. “An Overview of and Recommendations for More Accessible Digital Mental Health Services.” Nature Reviews Psychology 1, no. 2: 87–100. Macneil, C. A. , Hasty M., Cotton S., et al. 2012. “Can a Targeted Psychological Intervention Be Effective for Young People Following a First Manic Episode? Results From an 18‐Month Pilot Study.” Early Intervention in Psychiatry 6, no. 4: 380–388. Malhi, G. S. , Bell E., Bassett D., et al. 2021. “The 2020 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists Clinical Practice Guidelines for Mood Disorders.” Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 55, no. 1: 7–117. McGorry, P. D. , Edwards J., Mihalopoulos C., Harrigan S. M., and Jackson H. J.. 1996. “EPPIC: An Evolving System of Early Detection and Optimal Management.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 22, no. 2: 305–326. Miklowitz, D. J. , Price J., Holmes E. A., et al. 2012. “Facilitated Integrated Mood Management for Adults With Bipolar Disorder.” Bipolar Disorders 14, no. 2: 185–197. Moller‐Leimkuhler, A. M. 2002. “Barriers to Help‐Seeking by Men: A Review of Sociocultural and Clinical Literature With Particular Reference to Depression.” Journal of Affective Disorders 71, no. 1–3: 1–9. Murray, G. 2019. “What Would Digital Early Intervention for Bipolar Disorder Look Like? Theoretical and Translational Considerations for Future Therapies.” Frontiers in Psychiatry 10: 599. Ortiz, A. , Park Y., Gonzalez‐Torres C., et al. 2023. “Predictors of Adherence to Electronic Self‐Monitoring in Patients With Bipolar Disorder: A Contactless Study Using Growth Mixture Models.” International Journal of Bipolar Disorders 11, no. 1: 18. Osby, U. , Brandt L., Correia N., Ekbom A., and Sparen P.. 2001. “Excess Mortality in Bipolar and Unipolar Disorder in Sweden.” Archives of General Psychiatry 58, no. 9: 844–850. Perry, A. , Tarrier N., Morriss R., McCarthy E., and Limb K.. 1999. “Randomised Controlled Trial of Efficacy of Teaching Patients With Bipolar Disorder to Identify Early Symptoms of Relapse and Obtain Treatment.” BMJ 318, no. 7177: 149–153. Posner, K. , Brown G. K., Stanley B., et al. 2011. “The Columbia‐Suicide Severity Rating Scale: Initial Validity and Internal Consistency Findings From Three Multisite Studies With Adolescents and Adults.” American Journal of Psychiatry 168, no. 12: 1266–1277. Ratheesh, A. , Hett D., Ramain J., et al. 2023. “A Systematic Review of Interventions in the Early Course of Bipolar Disorder I or II: A Report of the International Society for Bipolar Disorders Taskforce on Early Intervention.” International Journal of Bipolar Disorders 11, no. 1: 1. Rice, S. , Gleeson J., Davey C., et al. 2018. “Moderated Online Social Therapy for Depression Relapse Prevention in Young People: Pilot Study of a ‘next Generation’ Online Intervention.” Early Intervention in Psychiatry 12, no. 4: 613–625. Richardson, J. , and Iezzi A.. 2011. Psychometric Validity and the AQoL‐8D Multi Attribute Utility Instrument. Centre for Health Economics, Monash University. Rickwood, D. , Paraskakis M., Quin D., et al. 2019. “Australia's Innovation in Youth Mental Health Care: The Headspace Centre Model.” Early Intervention in Psychiatry 13, no. 1: 159–166. Seidler, Z. E. , Rice S. M., Dhillon H. M., et al. 2020. “Patterns of Youth Mental Health Service Use and Discontinuation: Population Data From Australia's Headspace Model of Care.” Psychiatric Services 71, no. 11: 1104–1113. Sekhon, M. , Cartwright M., and Francis J. J.. 2017. “Acceptability of Healthcare Interventions: An Overview of Reviews and Development of a Theoretical Framework.” BMC Health Services Research 17, no. 1: 88. Sheehan, D. V. , Lecrubier Y., Sheehan K. H., et al. 1998. “The Mini‐International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): The Development and Validation of a Structured Diagnostic Psychiatric Interview for DSM‐IV and ICD‐10.” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 59: 22–33. Simon, J. , Budge K., Price J., Goodwin G. M., and Geddes J. R.. 2017. “Remote Mood Monitoring for Adults With Bipolar Disorder: An Explorative Study of Compliance and Impact on Mental Health Service Use and Costs.” European Psychiatry 45: 14–19. Taddeo, D. , Egedy M., and Frappier J. Y.. 2008. “Adherence to Treatment in Adolescents.” Paediatrics &amp; Child Health 13, no. 1: 19–24. Thomas, E. C. , Ben‐David S., Treichler E., et al. 2021. “A Systematic Review of Shared Decision‐Making Interventions for Service Users With Serious Mental Illnesses: State of the Science and Future Directions.” Psychiatric Services 72, no. 11: 1288–1300. Utter, J. , Denny S., Percival T., et al. 2012. “Prevalence of Weight‐Related Concerns and Behaviours Among New Zealand Young People.” Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health 48, no. 11: 1021–1028. Associated Data Supplementary Materials Data S1. Supporting Information. Data Availability Statement Data will potentially be available to researchers from not‐for profit organisations, commercial organisations or others based in any location. All data requests will be considered by the data custodian and the primary sponsor on a case‐by‐case basis. Requests must include a methodologically sound proposal. Specific conditions of use may apply and will be specified in a data sharing agreement (or similar) that the requester must agree to before access is granted. For further information, see Orygen data management policy.