379 blackwellopen Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica Acta Psychiatr Scand PMC12318650 12318650 12318650 40844121 10.1111/acps.13817 Treatment of Early‐Onset Specified and Unspecified Bipolar Disorders: A Systematic Review and Strategies for Identifying and Managing a Thermally Dysregulated Subtype in Children Papolos Demitri F 1 2 ✉ Teicher Martin H 3 4 Post Robert M 5 6 1 Juvenile Bipolar Research Foundation, Irvine, California, USA 2 Department of Psychiatry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, New York, USA 3 Developmental Biopsychiatry Research Program, McLean Hospital, Belmont, Massachusetts, USA 4 Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 5 Clinical Professor of Psychiatry, George Washington School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA 6 Bipolar Collaborative Network, Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA * Correspondence: Demitri F. Papolos ( dpapolos@icloud.com ) ✉ Corresponding author. 13 5 2025 152 3 156 156–179 5 8 2025 © 2025 The Author(s). Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd. This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. ABSTRACT Introduction Bipolar disorder (BD), characterized by extreme mood shifts between mania and depression, can manifest in childhood, and pose treatment challenges. Treatment for full‐criteria BD I or II in children has been partially described in the literature, but major uncertainties exist regarding non‐classic presentations, which were originally designated as bipolar “not otherwise specified” (BP‐NOS) in DSM‐IV and in DSM‐5 and ICD‐11 as either other specified or unspecified BD (S‐USBD). This review aims to provide literature‐based recommendations on the treatment of S‐USBD, with a focus on a fear of harm (FOH) subtype, now termed temperature and sleep dysregulation disorder (TSDD). Methods A broad systematic literature review with AI assistance was conducted to identify all articles in PubMed providing data on the treatment of children with either atypical BD, BD‐NOS, USBD, specified BD, rapid cycling BD, or a phenotype of BD. Aims Given the paucity of pharmacological treatment literature on any of the earliest forms of BD prior to their achieving a BP I or BP II diagnosis, it was felt that there was a critical need to review the existent literature on the earliest presentations and prodromes, which now fall under the rubric of specified (BD S‐USBD). Here, the focus is on the prevalent BP‐NOS subtype, which meets all the classical presentations of BP except for the brief durations of mania, and a more newly recognized form of S‐USBD called TSDD. Results Eleven family‐focused psychotherapy studies were identified, including nine randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with uniformly positive results versus the comparative group, which was treatment as usual (TAU) for unclear subtypes and subtypes of S‐USBD. Only three psychopharmacological RCTS were reported, and only one on aripiprazole in unspecified subtypes of S‐USBD in high‐risk children showed a significant difference from placebo. None of the controlled trials and only two case series provided separate outcome data on the S‐USBD subtypes, except for one that focused exclusively on the TSDD subtype. These two case series reports preliminarily defined the TSDD subtype and provided novel pharmacological treatment data, including lithium, clonidine, and ketamine, which led to good outcomes. Conclusion Good support was provided in the 11 studies for the use of adjunctive family‐focused psychotherapeutic approaches, and this approach should be considered an important part of any treatment regimen. The pharmacological treatment landscape for S‐USBD lacks a systematic research base, warranting further exploration with controlled clinical trials. Case series indicate promising treatment outcomes for TSDD with high‐dose lithium, clonidine, ketamine, and other cooling measures. Validation of this novel treatment strategy in controlled trials is needed to advance the management of the S‐USBD variants. Keywords: bipolar disorder, fear of harm, ketamine, sleep, temperature dysregulation, treatment‐resistant status released display-pdf yes is-in-collection-domain yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Revised 2025 Apr 9; Received 2024 Nov 17; Accepted 2025 Apr 16; Issue date 2025 Sep. Summary Summations ○ There is a substantial literature on the efficacy of adjunctive family‐focused psychotherapeutic approaches in specified or unspecified bipolar disorder (S‐USBD), suggesting this should be part of the standard of care. ○ Although S‐USBD can be severe and highly debilitating, there are minimal systematic data focused on this subtype's pharmacological treatment. ○ A large case series suggests that a subtype of S‐USBD called temperature and sleep disruptive disorder (TSDD) may respond well to novel manipulations aimed at heat dissipation. Limitations ○ Different subtypes of S‐USBD require more systematic diagnostic delineation and definition, especially around the issue of consistency of diagnosis and longitudinal trajectory. ○ Pharmacological studies in the spectrum of childhood‐onset BD rarely specify results separately for those with S‐USBD from those with bipolar I (BP I) or BP II disorder. ○ The novel potential treatment of TSDD with lithium, clonidine, and intranasal ketamine is based on only two case series and needs to be verified in controlled studies. 1. Introduction Given the paucity of pharmacological treatment literature on any of the prodromal forms of bipolar disorder prior to the onset of BP I or BP II diagnosis, it was felt that there was a critical need to review the existing literature on the earliest presentations and prodromes, which now fall under the rubric of other specified or unspecified BD (S‐USBD). Here, the focus is on the prevalent BP not otherwise specified (BP‐NOS) subtype, which meets all the classical presentations of BP except for the brief durations of mania [ 1 ], and a more newly recognized form of S‐USBD called temperature and sleep dysregulation disorder (TSDD). Prior diagnostic, therapeutic, and prevalence studies of childhood‐onset BD have centered almost exclusively on youths meeting full criteria for BP I and BP II disorders. Kowatch et al. [ 2 ] reviewed consensus recommendations for acute treatment of BP I mania (which included mood‐stabilizing anticonvulsants, atypical antipsychotics, and lithium) and on prophylaxis, but even in this instance, the recommendations were based more on clinical experience than on controlled clinical trials. More recently, Hobbs et al. [ 3 ] provided detailed algorithms for the treatment of mania, depression, and mixed episodes in youths exclusively with BD I, which were based primarily on clinical trials and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval. Likewise, Ratheesh et al. [ 4 ] dealt with only those meeting criteria for BD I or II and excluded consideration of those with S‐USBD or BP not otherwise specified (BP‐NOS), so there seemed to be a great need for a systematic review of possible treatments for these large groups of children who are often those afflicted with the earliest and most severe prodromal forms of the illness. A focus on these earliest manifestations of BP spectrum illness prior to their development in a full‐blown form would be of great importance, since the review of Ratheesh et al. [ 4 ] of the early but already fully manifest forms of BD provided highly suggestive data that earlier treatment was more effective than later treatment with lithium and several other agents. Thus, there is a great unmet need to discern what might be the most effective interventions in those at high risk or with prodromes to prevent or delay the onset of full BD. A major contribution of the current systematic review in S‐USBP is the revelation of the paucity of systematic data in the literature to guide clinical interventions with pharmacotherapy. At the same time, there is a modicum of promising data on the likely effectiveness of a variety of family and individual psychotherapeutic approaches to these early forms of BP. Epidemiological studies suggest that about 1.8% of children (age 7–21) meet full diagnostic criteria, which require a minimum duration of 4 days of hypomania for BD II and a week or more of mania for BD I [ 5 ]. However, the subtype of BD‐NOS was not included in these assessments. When BD‐NOS is included, prevalence rates can increase to 3%–6%. Merikangas et al. [ 6 ] reported a 2.9% prevalence of BD I and II in the United States, with severe impairment in 2.6%, but there was a distressingly low percentage of children who were in any kind of treatment. There is also considerable evidence that there is a higher incidence of early childhood‐ and adolescent‐onset BD in the United States compared to many European countries [ 7 , 8 , 9 ], making the need for new intervention studies even more pressing. 2. Aims of the Study The aim of this broad systematic review is to synthesize the current literature base examining data on the treatment of children with either atypical BD, BD‐NOS, USBD, specified BD, rapid cycling BD, or a phenotype of BD. 2.1. Diagnostic Controversies There has been some controversy about what criteria are required to meet the diagnosis of childhood‐onset BD. Liebenluft et al. [ 10 ] have taken the position that there must be a clear‐cut duration of episodes that conform to adult criteria of BD I or II and excluded those with rapidly fluctuating mood states as not part of a “narrow definition,” but instead falling within a “broad definition” of BD [ 11 ]. This latter category was thought to include those with severe mood dysregulation (SMD) that was not associated with a high incidence of a positive family history of BD, but was more likely to evolve into anxiety or depressive disorders in adolescents and young adults [ 12 ]. In one small study, children categorized with SMD (now called disruptive mood dysregulation disorder or DMDD) had chronic hyperactivity and high levels of irritability and were unresponsive to lithium [ 13 ]. Based on indirect inferences, these individuals were thought to respond well to stimulants and antidepressants. Biederman et al. [ 14 ] also recognized that there was a group of children who might not meet the criteria for BD as they did not exhibit clear mania with euphoric or irritable moods as defined in adults, but instead were likely to have attentional control problems, severe chronic irritability, deficits in emotional regulation, and behavioral dyscontrol. Axelson et al. [ 15 ] and Birmaher et al. [ 1 ], in the extensive ( N = 413, age 7–17) Course and Outcome of Bipolar Youth (COBY) study, described three subtypes of children with BD. The largest group was those with BD I ( n = 244). At the same time, 141 were labeled BD‐NOS and met the same criteria as BD I or II ( n = 28) groups, but with shorter manias below threshold duration for adult BD [ 1 ]. “Bipolar‐NOS was characterized by rates of comorbidity, suicidality, functional impairment (except hospitalizations), and family history for mood disorders equivalent to bipolar‐I and II groups.” They found that the BD‐NOS group had an earlier age of onset, was almost as severely impaired as the BD I or II groups, and took much longer (more than 2 years) to stabilize in comparison to those with BD I or II, who usually stabilized in under 1 year. Some of these youths would now meet DSM‐5/ICD‐11 criteria for “Other Specified BD with short‐duration hypomanic episodes (2–3 days) and major depressive episodes.” When children with BP‐NOS were followed prospectively for more than 4 years, about 50% with a positive family history of BD eventually converted to a BD I or II diagnosis [ 1 , 15 , 16 ]. Hafeman et al. [ 17 ] developed a risk calculator to estimate which children would convert to BD I or II. Brief periods of euphoria, mood lability, and a parent with an early‐onset illness history were recognized as risk factors. Finally, Birmaher et al. [ 18 ] reported that polygenic risk scores (PRS) were higher in children with BD and their BD parents than in other groups. Most important for this review was that the PRS were similar in the BD‐NOS subtypes to those of BP I and BP II. These data provide strong evidence that BD‐NOS is part of the classic BP spectrum and represents one of the earliest presentations of BD, accompanied by considerable disability and dysfunction. Leibenluft's [ 12 ] characterization of those with SMD eventually led to a more specific definition of DMDD in the DSM‐5. However, further study of those who met these criteria suggested that this array of symptoms was nonspecific, and the general syndrome was often seen in association with other diagnoses, including depression, anxiety, oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), attention‐deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and other disruptive behavioral disorders [ 19 , 20 ]. One of the motivations for developing the DMDD category was to reduce what, in the opinion of some investigators, was a too high incidence of BD diagnoses in the juvenile population [ 21 , 22 ]. Problematically, when the DMDD diagnosis was included in the DSM‐5, there were no treatment trials to describe the most efficacious treatments. A panel of experts from the World Health Organization's International Classification of Diseases, 11th Revision (ICD‐11) recommended that DMDD symptoms be more appropriately classified as an ODD specifier rather than a separate diagnosis. Mayes et al. [ 23 ] found that DMDD could not be differentiated from ODD based on symptomatology. Ninety‐two percent of children with DMDD symptoms had ODD, and 66% of children with ODD had DMDD symptoms, indicating that it is very unlikely to have DMDD symptoms without ODD, but that ODD can occur without DMDD symptoms. Eventually, the NIMH group did treat some children with DMDD and reported that only 35% responded to the combination of an antidepressant (citalopram) and stimulant (methylphenidate), compared to 6% on methylphenidate alone. Still, many also required a range of other treatments, as the children remained with considerable functional impairment [ 24 ]. 2.2. Aims Given the lack of a systematic pharmacological treatment literature on any of the earliest forms of BD prior to their achieving a BP I or BP II diagnosis, it was felt that there was a critical need to review the existing literature on the earliest presentations and prodromes which now fall under the rubric of S‐USBD. In this review, the focus is both on the prevalent and better‐known BP‐NOS subtype, which meets all the classical presentations of BP except for the brief durations of mania [ 1 ], and a more newly recognized form of S‐USBD called TSDD [ 25 , 26 ]. TSDD, in addition to the typical manifestations of BP, has three unique characteristics including fear of harm (FOH) to self and others, profound episodes of hyperthermia, and sleep disturbance with horrendous nightmares. This became a major focus of this review, as this subtype had the best, but uncontrolled, data for novel clinical interventions. 2.3. Method A broad AI–guided search of PubMed was conducted using the terms BP, treatment, and adolescent and the terms BP, treatment, and child in all relevant fields. A computer program written in R removed duplicates and articles without abstracts. The program then presented the title of the articles and the abstracts to ChatGPT‐3.5‐turbo through the API, and asked the following question: “Answer Yes or No only. Does the following article describe the effects of a specific treatment on bipolar disorder?” If the answer was “Yes,” the program then asked ChatGPT these two questions: “Answer Yes, No, or Unknown only. Does the article describe the effects of treatment in individuals younger than age 18 years?” and “Answer Yes, No, or Unknown only. Does the article describe the effects of treatment in individuals with either atypical bipolar disorder, bipolar disorder NOS, unspecified bipolar disorder, specified bipolar disorder, rapid cycling bipolar disorder, or a phenotype of bipolar disorder?” Citations that received three “Yes” responses were placed in one folder, those that received a “Yes” to Question 1 and “Unknown” to one or two of the subsequent questions, and zero “No” responses were placed into a separate folder. A third folder was created for files in which the total token size for the citation, abstract, and questions was likely to exceed ChatGPT‐3.5‐turbo's token limits. Abstracts and citations in these three folders were then reviewed by hand by DP and RP for inclusion and exclusion. Complete articles were then downloaded for those citations and abstracts with consensus agreement, and results were tabled. For completeness, a second search was conducted using EMBASE. The methodology was the same, except we filtered citations and abstracts to remove those previously identified in the PubMed search, and ChatGPT‐4o‐mini was used to select potentially relevant citations using the three previously delineated questions. 2.4. Results As illustrated in Figure 1 , 11,174 citations were identified through PubMed and culled to 7319 after removing duplicates and citations without abstracts. The AI search reduced the number of citations to 40 probable and 525 possible. Of these, n = 23 articles were found eligible following joint review by two of the authors. Eleven family‐focused psychotherapy studies were thus identified, including nine randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and three psychopharmacological RCTS. As illustrated in Figure 2 , the Embase search retrieved 4399 citations for children and 764 for adolescents. Three hundred and seventy‐eight citations were removed as duplicates. A total of 256 were removed for missing abstracts, leaving a total of 4529 citations. One thousand five hundred and ninety‐four of these citations were in the PubMed file and were removed, leaving a total of 1935 novel citations that were processed through ChatGPT‐4o‐mini. This search identified 40 citations that appeared to meet all criteria and 30 citations that satisfied some criteria and were indeterminate on the other criteria. These 70 citations were reviewed by one of the authors, and he concluded that none of these met our inclusion and exclusion criteria. This was largely because most of these were meeting abstracts and not peer‐reviewed articles. 2.5. Pharmacological Interventions in Study Populations That Included Children With BD‐NOS There were 12 studies that met our inclusion criteria; only three were RCTs (the remainder were open studies or case reports). One important study that was not included because the cases were treated naturalistically [ 27 ], followed a group of children with the entire spectrum of BD (BD I, BD II, and NOS) longitudinally. They found that those who were treated most of the time with lithium had more successful outcomes than those treated with some mood‐stabilizing anticonvulsants or atypical antipsychotics. Those on lithium spent less time depressed and made fewer suicide attempts than the other groups. These non‐randomized open follow‐up data are highly reminiscent of Geller et al. [ 28 ] in their 8‐year follow‐up of children with BD treated naturalistically in the community. Many of these children showed ultrarapid and ultradian cycling and would very likely have met the later‐derived diagnosis of BD‐NOS. Geller et al. [ 28 ] found that 47% of these well‐diagnosed children were never treated with any of the medications considered appropriate for BD, that is, lithium, a mood‐stabilizing anticonvulsant, or an atypical antipsychotic. However, those treated with lithium fared the best and had the longest time in remission. In one of the few randomized but open treatment trials of children with BD, Geller et al. [ 29 ] reported that risperidone was more effective than lithium or valproate, and upon re‐randomization, those who had risperidone in the regimen again did the best. However, risperidone had more sedative side effects, and there were major differences in efficacy by site. In a placebo (PBO)‐controlled study, Findling et al. [ 30 ] found that lithium was efficacious in BD I mania, although children with S‐USBD were not included in that study. In DSM‐5 and ICD‐11, the diagnosis of BD‐NOS was discontinued. Instead, several variants were specified, including short‐duration hypomanic episodes (2–3 days) and major depressive episodes; hypomanic episodes with insufficient symptoms and major depressive episodes; and hypomanic episodes without a prior major depressive episode. In addition, a new category of USBD was created to label cases in which symptoms characteristic of a BP and related disorders were present that cause clinically significant distress or impairment but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the BP and related disorders diagnostic class. This category was largely reserved for situations in which the clinician chose not to specify the reason that the criteria were not met and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis, such as in an emergency room setting. Unfortunately, the only non‐classical variant of BD that has been rigorously defined [ 1 , p. 27636] (Birmaher and Axelson [ 31 ], p. 6359) and carefully researched, which was referred to as BD‐NOS, was not included as an Other Specified variant, possibly because it included children with brief periods of mania (as short as 4 h/day during 4 consecutive days). However, these children meet all the other criteria for BD and have high rates of conversion to BD I or II [ 1 , p. 27636, 129 ]. This is the form of the condition that has been described as ultrarapid or ultradian (within the day) cycling in the classical literature (Kramlinger [ 32 ], p. 118). Table 1 includes the pharmacological studies meeting our literature search criteria for the group of children characterized under the rubric of BP‐NOS or S‐USBD and other aspects of the BP spectrum, including cyclothymia. This combined group will be referred to for convenience as USBD. Only three controlled studies focused exclusively on the group meeting our selection criteria for USBD. These included: Findling et al. [ 35 ], and Findling et al. [ 34 ]. McNamara et al. [ 33 ] compared fish oil 2100 mg/day to PBO for 12 weeks and found that it was not superior to PBO on the CDRS‐R. The control group was most often treated as usual and rarely included a formal PBO arm, but was based on a clinician rating of global improvement. The most informative RCT study was that of Findling et al. [ 35 ], which lasted up to 5 years and reported that DVPX in 29 individuals did not prove superior to the 27 on PBO. This study thus coincides with other data in children with BP I mania about the ambiguity of the efficacy of DVPX in children, as opposed to the well‐demonstrated efficacy in adults with BP I mania. The third RCT (Findling et al. [ 34 ]) compared 30 children randomized to aripiprazole (APZ) for 12 weeks to 29 on PBO in those at high genetic risk for BD and found that APZ decreased mania scores on the YMRS more rapidly than on PBO. These data are of interest to the findings on APZ in BP I adults, where there are positive data for the prevention of total and manic episodes, but not depressions, such that the efficacy on depressive symptoms in Findling et al. [ 34 ] remains obscure. Results with an open‐label study of paliperidone for 8 weeks also yielded significant reductions in YMRS scores, as well as improvements in the severity of ADHD and psychotic symptoms. However, increases in body weight over the 8 weeks were substantial. Likewise, in another open study, Joshi et al. [ 37 ] found that quetiapine monotherapy for 8 weeks was beneficial in BP spectrum disorder in children aged 4–6 years and 6–15 years, but with very substantial weight gain. These data contrast with the lack of efficacy of quetiapine in an RCT of youngsters with BP depression, as opposed to clear‐cut efficacy in adults with BP depression. The open chart review data on quetiapine in 22 youngsters also reported positive effects over 6 months, but only 6 had a USBD diagnosis. If one takes these open data on atypicals with those of Geller et al. [ 29 ], which involved an open randomization to risperidone, lithium, or VPA, it would appear possible that the atypical antipsychotics as a group may have effectiveness in youngsters with early BP spectrum symptoms, but at the cost of substantial weight gain. Moreover, a lack of methodological rigor is inherent in all the case series discussed, including the two longitudinal studies of lithium (Geller et al. [ 43 ]; Hafeman et al. [ 27 ]), as well as the open case series of Papolos et al. [ 26 ] and Papolos et al. [ 25 ]. These studies also included the risk of bias, and there was an obvious absence of blinding. In the open randomized studies of Geller without a PBO, there was also a high risk of lack of blinding because of the three active drugs' highly differential side effects. Again, the Geller et al. [ 43 ] data were not presented in such a way as to discern the relative effectiveness in those with USBD compared to those meeting criteria for BP I and BP II. This designation of the “Results Not Given Separately” (RNGS) by diagnosis was the case for most of the open and comparative studies. However, this was not an issue in the open case series of Papolos et al. [ 26 ], where the focus was exclusively on the USBD subtype of TSDD as described below. In addition, the open studies of Clayton et al. [ 39 ] showing improvement with LCn‐3PUFA for 6 weeks are difficult to interpret because only four patients had USBD. The chart review of Ghaemi et al. on zonisamide showed it was not effective. The study of Soutullo et al. [ 41 ] of lamotrigine ( N = 5) was too small to be interpreted. Given the paucity of data on pharmacological treatment effectiveness in the USBD subtypes, the authors focused on the larger open series of Papolos et al. in TSDD, as discussed below. 2.6. Psychotherapy Interventions in Study Populations That Included Children With BP‐NOS Table 2 includes the psychotherapeutic studies meeting our literature search criteria for the group of children characterized under the rubric of BP‐NOS or USBD and other aspects of the BP spectrum including cyclothymia. The control group was most often treatment as usual (TAU) and rarely included a formal PBO arm. Of the 11 psychotherapy studies included in this review, 9 were RCTs (where the comparator was TAU) and 2 were open‐label, 9 were family‐focused, primarily cognitive/behavioral or family psychoeducational. The large majority were adjunctive studies administered in conjunction with maintenance medications (MMs). Diagnostic descriptions included well defined categories of BD, while others involved high‐risk individuals with positive family histories of BD in first‐degree relatives. Similar to pharmacotherapy studies, none of the psychotherapy studies reported results separately distinguishing between distinct diagnostic categories of BPD. However, in contradistinction to pharmacotherapy studies, almost all showed medium to large effect sizes for the broad BP spectrum. Of note, were three large‐scale, family‐focused studies of long duration conducted by Miklowitz [ 53 ] and Miklowitz et al. [ 45 , 52 ], which examined the moderating effects of family‐focused/psychoeducational interventions, and more specifically, expressed emotion (EE) versus enhanced care, on symptomatic outcomes. These were associated with more rapid recovery from mood symptoms, more time in remission, and a more favorable trajectory of hypomania symptoms compared with brief family education. Several RCTs have investigated the efficacy of psychotherapy interventions for youths with BD, including BD‐NOS and cyclothymic disorder. These studies primarily examine cognitive‐behavioral therapy (CBT), family‐focused therapy (FFT), dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), psychoeducation, and omega‐3 supplementation as adjunctive treatments to pharmacotherapy. Several studies have assessed the impact of FFT on BP youth. Miklowitz [ 53 ] and Miklowitz et al. [ 51 , 52 ] investigated FFT‐A (for adolescents) and FFT‐HR (for high‐risk youth) and found that FFT accelerated recovery from depressive symptoms but did not significantly delay the recurrence of manic episodes. Notably, the impact of FFT was moderated by parental EE, with youth in high‐EE families experiencing greater reductions in both depressive and manic symptoms. Weintraub et al. [ 46 ] further explored whether improvements in psychosocial functioning mediated mood improvements in FFT and found that enhanced family functioning contributed to reductions in depressive symptoms, particularly for youth with comorbid anxiety and externalizing disorders. These studies highlight the importance of targeting family dynamics in psychosocial interventions for BP youth, as higher family conflict may exacerbate mood symptoms. Of the two cognitive behavioral studies, Arman et al. [ 47 ] compared an experimental group that combined CBT (C‐CBT) and MMs versus MM alone, and found a decrease in depression scores but no effect on manic symptoms or relapse rate. In a trial of DBT versus family skills training (FST) over 1 year, consisting of 18 weeks of either individual DBT or FST, Goldstein et al. [ 49 ] found a large effect size for more weeks being euthymic among adolescents receiving DBT and significantly greater attendance at therapy sessions than those receiving psychosocial treatment alone. Goldstein et al. [ 49 ] conducted a pilot RCT comparing DBT to TAU in adolescents aged 12–18 years with BD. DBT resulted in greater therapy engagement, fewer depressive symptoms, and lower suicidal ideation compared to TAU. Although no significant differences were observed in manic symptoms, adolescents in the DBT group demonstrated improvements in emotional dysregulation and had more weeks of euthymia over the follow‐up period. This suggests that DBT may be particularly useful for mood stabilization and suicidality in this population. Finally, Fristad et al. [ 48 ] examined the efficacy of Individual Family Psychoeducational Psychotherapy (IF‐PEP) and omega‐3 fatty acid supplementation in youth with BD‐NOS and cyclothymic disorder. IF‐PEP was associated with moderate‐to‐large reductions in depressive symptoms, while omega‐3 supplementation had a smaller effect. These results indicate that psychoeducation can be an effective intervention for managing mood symptoms, and while omega‐3 supplementation may provide mild benefits, it is not sufficient as a standalone treatment. Overall, these studies suggest that psychosocial interventions, particularly those incorporating family involvement, can be beneficial for BP youth, especially in reducing depressive symptoms. While FFT, psychoeducation, and CBT‐based approaches show promise in improving mood stability and psychosocial functioning, their effects on manic symptoms remain inconclusive. Additionally, parental EE appears to moderate treatment outcomes, emphasizing the need to consider family dynamics when implementing psychotherapy interventions for youth with BD. 2.7. Discussion This review focuses on two different definitions and subtypes of what is now called USBD. The first is the more readily observed that was initially called BP‐NOS because of its attenuated durations of mania. Its recognition and definition have migrated over time and are now subsumed under the rubric of S‐USBD, but it is clearly prevalent and one of the earliest presentations of childhood BD. Childhood‐onset BD was recognized as early as Kraepelin [ 55 ], but modern psychiatry imbued its presence with controversy and disagreements about its definition, as discussed above. BP I and II are now well recognized in clinical and epidemiological samples, although the average age of onset appears to differ in many locales [ 7 , 8 , 9 ]. BP‐NOS was precisely described and defined by Birmaher et al. [ 1 ] in their COBY studies and seen as a very early and severe subtype which, upon several years of follow‐up, often (about 50% of the time when there was a positive family history of BD) evolved into more classical presentations of BP I and BP II. Disappointingly, treatment studies of BP‐NOS were rarely undertaken as separate studies in this discrete population, and most of the information about treatment was indirectly inferred from the few studies on BP I children [ 2 ] and in a few studies that included this BP‐NOS subtype within the larger study cohort [ 1 , 27 , 29 ]. Lithium appears to be an increasingly appreciated approach to those with childhood onsets with a range of BP spectrum diagnoses. Risperidone, in a randomized, open study, proved more effective than lithium or valproate but was limited by increased side effects [ 29 ]. Other better‐tolerated atypicals have not been studied in USBP, although lurasidone is FDA‐approved for children 10–17 with BP depression [ 56 ]. It and other well‐tolerated atypicals deserve specific study in this first subtype of the USBD population. Thus, it is important to note that even in the most common and well‐recognized form of what was originally called BP‐NOS, several initial pharmacological approaches have received some support, but treatment sequences following these to achieve good long‐term outcomes are obscure and remain to be defined. There is currently no consensus among experts in child and adult BD as to how to proceed [ 57 ]. This review highlights a second subtype of USBD, that of TSDD, which has all the elements of BP‐NOS, but also some unique features not present in the traditional description of BP‐NOS by Birmaher et al. [ 1 ]. The three major clinical characteristics that differentiate TSDD from classic BP‐NOS include (I) fear‐based aggression with suicidal and homicidal ideas and actions; (II) thermal dysregulation with overheating seen with the presence of a flushed face and red ears and a high tolerance for cold; and (III) marked sleep disturbance with multiple arousals, horrific nightmares, and terrors. If these three differentiating elements are recognized and addressed, these extremely dysregulated and impaired children can be treated with a regimen pioneered by Papolos et al. [ 25 ]. It involves high‐dose lithium, clonidine, melatonin ( N ‐acetyl‐5‐methoxy tryptamine), and other measures to enhance body cooling, sleep onset, and parasomnias; and then ascending doses of intranasal ketamine to find an optimal maintenance dose. We emphasize that these clinical case series observations have not yet been supported by evidence from controlled clinical trials. However, this unusual combination of treatments deserves presentation and discussion, as the conventional treatments typically employed in these children are usually ineffective. This leaves children with TSDD and their families highly dysfunctional, and social and educational opportunities become limited throughout their adolescence and early adulthood. 2.8. TSDD, Formerly Termed FOH, Is a Unique Subtype of USBD Besides the children described as BP‐NOS by Birmaher et al. [ 1 ], who exhibit all the classical features of BD except for the duration of mania, there is a second subgroup of children that meet criteria for USBD that deserves special attention. These children, now classified as TSDD, were initially labeled with the diagnosis of FOH phenotype described in detail by Papolos and colleagues [ 25 , 26 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 ]. FOH was based on a dimensional diagnosis derived from a concordance study between affected sibling pairs that found a heritable behavioral trait associated with a profile of clinical dimensions in addition to classic mood symptomatology, delineated from a database of 6500 symptom profiles from children with or at risk for BD. These children with TSDD also met all the Birmaher et al. [ 1 ] (Birmaher and Axelson [ 31 ]) criteria for BP‐NOS, but they also have three other unique characteristics. These include: FOH : FOH to self and FOH to others, defensive aggression directed toward others and self, separation anxiety, aggressive obsessions (including recurrent self‐recriminatory thoughts), misperception of neutral stimuli as threatening, and behavioral symptoms that mimic those of post‐traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), along with abrupt, rapid transitions of mood and arousal. Thermal dysregulation : Children with TSDD often feel hot and sweat excessively in neutral ambient temperatures and in response to emotional stimuli (stress‐induced hyperthermia). This overheating is evident by the flushed appearance of the cheeks and the bright red color of the pinna of the ears. TSDD children are also often tolerant of or insensitive to cold temperatures and will comfortably venture out with little clothing on cold winter days. They alternate noticeably between being excessively hot in the evening and cold in the morning. This tendency to generate excessive heat or a deficit in heat dissipation at night results in shortened REM latency and disturbances in REM/NREM transitions during sleep in childhood and beyond [ 58 ] (Papolos, unpublished observations). Sleep disturbances : These include sleep‐onset insomnia and morning sleep inertia, as well as parasomnias (night terrors, horrific and vivid nightmares, sleep‐walking, sleep‐talking, bruxism, enuresis, and sleep–wake reversals). Given the lack of clear guidelines for the treatment of the well‐recognized BP‐NOS subtype of USBD, but new information about a highly effective treatment regimen for the TSDD subtype of USBD, we highlight the specific characteristics that distinguish TSDD from BP‐NOS. If clinicians explicitly ask about these unique elements, they will likely recognize some children with TSDD. We summarize in Table 3 some of the key aspects of the syndrome that should raise a clinician's suspicion that they reflect the TSDD syndrome and not the more traditional aspects of BP spectrum disorder and its many well‐recognized comorbidities. FOH Fear of the dark, fear of intruders, and separation anxiety Defensive aggression toward others Self‐directed aggressive behavior (bites, hits, and cuts self) Misperceives neutral stimuli as threatening Concern about dirt, germs, and contamination Temperature dysregulation Pinna of ears bright red (during periods of anxiety, anger, or embarrassment) Facial flushing (during periods of anxiety, anger, or embarrassment) Excessive sweating (during exercise, before and during sleep, in response to perceived threat) Moderate to extreme tolerance to cold (goes out under‐dressed and without a coat in cold ambient temperatures) Sensitive to seasonal and rapid changes in temperature, humidity Distinctive sleep disturbances Nightmares (with gore, blood, and violence) Night terrors (child wakes up screaming) Hypnagogic hallucinations (of threatening individuals) Sleep‐walking and sleep‐talking Sleep inertia Sleep phase delay disorder Enuresis Bruxism Other aspects (but not a separate subtype) Carbohydrate craving and binging Hoards or avidly seeks to collect objects or food TSDD is associated in early childhood with the advent of recurrent, vivid, gory, horrific nightmares with themes of pursuit and abandonment. The apparent psychological sequelae of exposure to this frequent, frightening imagery is fear sensitization (auto‐traumatization). A developmental sequence of fear‐based defensive behaviors results, including obsessive/anxious bedtime rituals, fear of the dark, separation anxiety, intruder and contamination phobias, hypervigilance, misperception of neutral stimuli as threatening, and reactive aggression in response to limit‐setting and perceived threat or loss. In parallel, an ensemble of fear‐based cognition and behaviors evolves into adulthood patterns that become prominent traits and dominant personality features. This sequence can be interrupted or modified appreciably with early identification and intervention as described below [ 61 , 63 ]. The core features of FOH/TSDD emerged from an effort to identify homogeneous phenotypes for genetic studies of pediatric BD using an endophenotype approach similar to Cheng et al. [ 64 ] and Faraone et al. [ 65 ] in a large sample of youths ( N = 5335) who had been given a community diagnosis of BD or were at high risk to develop this disorder based on an enriched family history [ 60 , 61 ]. Of the 10 factors extracted from the Child Bipolar Questionnaire (CBQ), the strongest concordance coefficients (rho) between probands and siblings, and the widest contrasts between proband/sibling versus proband/comparison pairs, were for the factor termed FOH, which strongly suggests that it is a heritable trait [ 60 ]. 2.9. A Preliminary Treatment Paradigm for TSDD The general treatment strategy outlined here has been described by Papolos et al. [ 25 , 26 ] and is associated with marked improvement in behavior, sleep, and physiological dysfunction. The essence of the treatment paradigm is outlined in Tab. 5. The details of the treatment protocol are further delineated in a supplement available at https://www.jbrf.org/treatment‐protocol/ . A few of the significant components of each of the suggested treatments are reviewed below. 2.9.1. Lithium In adult studies, lithium has the most substantial evidence for long‐term relapse prevention; the evidence for anticonvulsants such as divalproex and lamotrigine is less robust, and there is much uncertainty about the longer‐term benefits of antipsychotics [ 66 ]. Lithium is clinically effective in roughly half of the treated individuals, where their genetic background is known to influence treatment outcomes [ 67 ]. As described above for children with both BP‐NOS and BP I, lithium has an increasingly recognized role in the treatment of childhood‐onset BD [ 27 , 29 , 68 , 69 ]. In the clinical sample with TSDD of Papolos et al. [ 25 ], higher serum lithium levels within the upper range of normal (1.0–1.2 meq/L) were often necessary to achieve complete mood stabilization. Additionally, lithium is neuroprotective and has many other assets beyond mood stabilization [ 70 ], and has also been found to specifically protect against high‐dose ketamine‐induced apoptosis in primate toxicology studies [ 71 ]. 2.9.2. Oxcarbazepine One of the most important advances in psychopharmacology of the last century was the recognition of the mood‐stabilizing properties of lithium [ 72 , 73 ]. This was followed years later by the recognition that carbamazepine and other anticonvulsants have mood‐stabilizing properties as well [ 74 ]. Clinical experience favors lithium for treating TSDD, but oxcarbazepine (OXC) extended release (Oxtellar XR) may be a satisfactory adjunct or alternative if lithium cannot be tolerated. In a randomized study cited as a negative, OXC was more effective than PBO in the subgroup of younger patients aged 7–12 years of age, but not adolescents 13–17 [ 75 ]. In a large open retrospective case series, OXC was highly effective across a diverse array of childhood psychiatric symptoms [ 76 ]. OXC is usually given twice a day, but the long‐acting preparation Oxtellar can be conveniently given in a single night‐time dose. OXC should be titrated slowly to avoid side effects, but doses can range from 600 to 1500 mg HS. 2.9.3. Sleep and Bedroom Temperature Room temperature is a critical determinant of sleep quality, especially for youths with TSDD. Sleep experts suggest an optimal room temperature range of 15.5°C–19.4°C for children, adolescents, and adults, and only slightly higher for infants and toddlers [ 77 ]. Nocturnal heat dissipation is critical for sleep initiation and REM stability [ 78 , 79 ]. 2.9.4. Melatonin Melatonin, an evolutionarily ancient peptide derivative of tryptophan with hormonal properties, is synthesized by the pineal gland in most vertebrate species and is directly released at night into the blood. In all species, including ancient bacteria, it serves an essential role as an antioxidant. In present‐day animals, melatonin functions in regulating sleep, modulation of circadian rhythms, and enhancement of immunity [ 80 , 81 ]. Melatonin plays a vital role in sleep induction via its effects on vascular tone. Briefly, sleep onset is coupled to the shifting of circulation from the core to the periphery, which increases skin temperature, enhances heat dissipation, and lowers core body temperature. Melatonin serves as nature's nocturnal vascular modulator by regulating vascular tone in selective vascular beds as circulating melatonin levels rise and fall throughout the night [ 82 ]. Abnormal melatonin circadian rhythms are a hallmark of sleep disorders, characterized by a misalignment between the sleep period and the physical/social 24‐h environmental cycle. Exogenous melatonin can stabilize these periodic disruptions in sleep and activity rhythms [ 83 , 84 ]. Patients with mood disorders and TSDD have repeatedly been shown to have irregular circadian rhythms compared to healthy control subjects [ 58 , 80 , 85 , 86 , 87 ]. Several studies have observed that patients with mood disorders have abnormal melatonin secretion, including a later nocturnal peak secretion, reduced secretion amplitude, and a super‐sensitive suppression of melatonin secretion by light [ 86 ]. Melatonin (usually 0.5–5 mg daily, although doses lower than 3 mg are often sufficient) can synchronize a non‐24 h sleep–wake cycle to 24 h in the vast majority of patients [ 83 , 88 , 89 ]. In TSDD, closer to physiological doses of melatonin, 600 mcg immediate release (IR) and 750 mcg extended‐release (ER) an hour before sleep, can be utilized. 2.9.5. Clonidine Clonidine, a selective, partial [alpha] 2 ‐adrenoreceptor agonist that acts centrally and peripherally as a vasodilator, has significant effects on thermoregulation [ 90 , 91 , 92 , 93 ]. The long‐acting formulation is approved for use in the treatment of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and has long been used off‐label to treat stimulant‐induced insomnia [ 94 , 95 ]. In individuals with TSDD, clonidine has been used primarily to promote heat dissipation, improve sleep initiation (reduce early insomnia), and enhance sleep continuity. Emotionally significant stimuli, including potential threats from the external environment, can trigger an increase in body temperature, a response known as emotional hyperthermia [ 96 ]. Clonidine ER inhibits sympathetically mediated brown adipose tissue thermogenesis, which contributes substantially to this hyperthermic response, and clonidine has been used effectively to improve heat dissipation and inhibit heat generation [ 92 , 97 , 98 , 99 ], and appears to function in this manner in TSDD (Papolos, unpublished observations). Clonidine is started at 0.1 mg IR HS and slowly titrated to 0.4 mg IR. If overheating and stress‐induced hyperthermia are present, it can be given in the mid to late afternoon in IR or ER forms, weighing benefits against sedation. Periods of stress‐induced hyperthermia accompanied by irritable/elated mood states, hyperactivity, and aggressive/explosive outbursts often occur diurnally in the mid to late afternoon. 2.9.6. Thermal Cooling Adjunctive measures to enhance body cooling through an increase in heat dissipation include total body immersion (bath or pool in lukewarm water), ventilation (mobile and oscillating fans worn around the neck or rotating in place near open areas of skin), and direct cooling (ice bandanas, ice hats that directly cool neck and scalp veins), as well as ambient temperature and humidity adjustments. These methods are implemented before or at the time of the initiation of pharmacological treatment [ 25 , 26 ]. Several basic principles and assumptions guide the typical cooling schedule: (1) on arising from a supine position from sleep, heat is generated through muscular movement and brain activity; (2) when supine at the time of sleep onset, vasodilation enhances the release of heat as insensible loss as the body cools; (3) individuals with TSDD have a disturbance in the capacity to transfer heat from the core to the periphery. They sequester heat within the body over the day, have an excessive hyperthermic response to stressors (emotional hyperthermia), and overheat when supine before sleep onset. Total body immersion in warm water for 15–20 min and an oscillating cooling fan at the bedside are helpful and convenient strategies. When feasible, a typical daily thermal cooling routine begins every 2 h from 12 noon to 6 pm and thereafter. At these times, the youngster drinks 12–16 oz. of ice water to cool the core and ventilates the face with a fan for 15 min. Alternatively, an ice hat or cooling neck bandana is used. (Note: Children taking lithium need to maintain stable sodium levels, which can be facilitated by drinking isotonic solutions such as Propel or Gatorade‐Zero.) 2.9.7. Ketamine Ketamine, an N ‐methyl‐ d ‐aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist known foremost for its anesthetic, analgesic, and anti‐shivering properties, is a racemic mixture comprised of equal parts of ( R )‐ketamine and ( S )‐ketamine [ 100 ]. It did not have a clinical indication in psychiatry until March 2019 with the FDA approval of intranasal Spravato [( S )‐ketamine] for refractory depression (2019) [ 101 ]. Ketamine was initially selected as a potential treatment for TSDD when it became apparent that mood stabilization alone with lithium was insufficient to abolish the cardinal symptoms of the syndrome. A literature review at the time (circa 2006) revealed that ketamine was the only drug found in animal studies to dramatically reduce conditioned fear and fear sensitization and dose‐dependently decrease core body temperature. It was in widespread use, could be safely administered to children, and was approved by the FDA for other indications [ 102 , 103 , 104 ]. Though RCTs have not been conducted, clinical experience and naturalistic studies with retrospective blind chart reviews have found that individuals with TSDD typically have a good to excellent response to intranasal ketamine, which appears to work optimally when combined with lithium, with enduring benefits for as long as the patients have been followed with regular intermittent intranasal ketamine treatment [ 25 ]. Rarely have adverse effects required ketamine discontinuation. There has been no evidence of abuse of the drug in over 200 cases followed clinically by Papolos et al. [ 26 ]. The first known administration of racemic ketamine in TSDD was given as a 0.3 mg/kg slow iv infusion to a 4½‐year‐old child during a dental procedure. Within 2 h following the procedure, parents observed that most, if not all, of the defining symptoms of TSDD ceased, including separation anxiety, fearfulness, agitation, oppositional/aggressive behaviors, debilitating recurrent nightmares, as well as the thermal dysregulation that had characterized her presentation prior to the infusion. She remained asymptomatic for 10 days, but then thermal discomfort (overheating, facial flushing, reddened ear pinnae followed by sleep‐onset insomnia and nightmares) reappeared. This patient has remained stable on lithium salts (serum level 1.1 mM) and three times weekly instillations of intranasal ketamine for a decade and has recently matriculated to college. Papolos et al. [ 25 ] found that a solution for the administration of intranasal racemic ketamine can be compounded effectively at concentrations in the range of 100–150 mg/mL. In its native form, ketamine is a crystalline substance that can more easily precipitate out of solution above 150 mg/mL. The effective shelf life of ketamine kept in darkness at room temperature is probably not more than 4 weeks. To initiate treatment, a solution of 100 mg/mL is administered into each nostril in a 0.1 mg metered spray bottle (10 mg/spray) that is readily available by physician's prescription at most compounding pharmacies in the United States. Additional insufflations are given incrementally depending on clinical assessment over 25 min until mild ataxia or signs of early dissociative effects appear. An incremental dose titration delivered every other day is based on signs of clinical improvement and the development of tolerance to acute adverse effects. Papolos et al. [ 25 ] found that the measurement of therapeutic efficacy relied on two primary outcome measures: daily changes in the FOH Index (FOH‐I) determined from a parental rating of an eight‐item Likert scale and resolution of the majority of core phenotype symptoms on the CBQ [ 63 ]. Typically, the thermoregulatory symptoms improve first in tandem with sleep‐onset insomnia and sleep continuity. 2.9.8. Blue Wavelength Light Patients with TSDD exhibit delayed sleep onset, are typically hot before sleep, and often have night sweats. In TSDD, this form of early insomnia is strongly associated with a disturbance in the distal‐minus proximal temperature gradient (DPG 0 ), a circadian marker for sleep onset in humans [ 105 ]. Because these patients have a significant delay in the main sleep period relative to the sleep–wake time, the usual zeitgebers for arousal into social life are lost. This combination of disturbances in sleep and arousal, difficulty falling asleep as well as difficulty waking up, sleep inertia, daytime sleepiness, and poor energy, is a form of circadian sleep disturbance commonly referred to as delayed sleep–wake phase disorder (DSWPD) [ 106 ], and officially termed Circadian Rhythm Sleep–Wake Disorder—delayed sleep phase type in DSM‐5. Circadian rhythms are entrained by light, with relatively recent studies showing that intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells, rather than rods or cones, convey information to the suprachiasmatic nuclei and other non‐visual brain regions. These cells use a unique photopigment called melanopsin and are specifically responsive to blue wavelength light at around 460–470 nm [ 107 ]. Hence, blue wavelength light is particularly effective in regulating circadian rhythms and may require less time and/or lower light irradiance than full‐spectrum or white light [ 107 ]. Blue light therapy has been reported to improve subjective sleep quality, reduce the number and duration of nocturnal awakenings, improve daytime function, and phase shift the sleep cycle [ 106 ]. In TSDD, we use blue wavelength light (Philips goLITE BLU) as an alerting signal upon awakening to diminish morning sleep inertia and to entrain and phase advance the circadian clock. Typically, this requires 15–30 min of exposure. However, clinical experience has demonstrated that ketamine appears to markedly potentiate the activating effects of blue wavelength light. For example, while 30–45 min of light is typically prescribed to diminish symptoms of seasonal affective disorder during the fall–winter transition, individuals with TSDD receiving ketamine may benefit from only 1–10 min of blue wavelength light. They can experience symptoms of agitation and hypomania with more prolonged exposure periods. Accordingly, a typical titration schedule for youth receiving ketamine begins with 2 min of bright light exposure at 200 lx, which is increased by 1 min each day until the desired clinical outcome is achieved. The usual dosage range is 200 lx for 3–10 min. This device can be beneficial during seasonal transitions when the photoperiod abruptly changes from alternately longer dark to longer light periods. Interestingly, there are some important similarities between TSDD and PTSD, with patients with TSDD becoming fear‐sensitized or auto‐traumatized by their nightmares. Recent studies have reported that morning treatment with blue wavelength light diminished sleep complaints and symptom severity and facilitated fear extinction in PTSD [ 108 ]. Further, morning treatment with blue wavelength light increased total sleep duration and left amygdala volume, which was associated with a reduction in nightmare severity [ 109 ]. Conversely, nocturnal exposure to blue wavelength light from smartphones, laptops, and other devices can significantly delay sleep onset and reduce sleep quality [ 110 ]. Hence, we recommend that individuals with TSDD use blue light‐blocking glasses and limit their screen time for an hour or more before bedtime. 2.9.9. Dawn Simulation Dawn simulation can be used as an alternative to the early morning use of blue wavelength light. A meta‐analysis (based on 127 patients in 3 trials) by Golden et al. [ 111 ] found that dawn simulation and bright light therapy reduced depressive symptom severity more than PBO for seasonal affective disorder and that bright light therapy also reduced symptom severity [ 111 ]. A single dawn signal applied by devices such as the Smart Sleep and Wake‐up Light (Philips, Cambridge, MA, USA) can simulate the waveform of the dawn or dusk signal at any latitude and any day of the year and is sufficient to phase advance melatonin secretion and phase shift the circadian pacemaker in primates at a fraction of the white light illuminance previously used after awakening [ 112 ]. For patients with TSDD and a delayed sleep phase‐type circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorder, it is recommended that dusk simulation begin a ½ hour before the desired time of sleep onset [ 106 ] and that dawn simulation should be set to occur about a half hour before the desired time of morning awakening. For this treatment to be effective, dusk and dawn simulation should take place in an otherwise darkened room. 2.10. What About Second‐Generation Antipsychotics? Hobbs et al. [ 3 ] recommended using second‐generation antipsychotics (SGAs) as the first step in treating mania and mixed states in youth with BP 1 disorder. Their second recommendation was to try a different SGA if the first was not successful. Most of the youths with TSDD treated successfully using the approach outlined in this article had previously been prescribed an array of SGAs but experienced little, if any, clinical benefit [ 25 , 26 ]. One possible explanation is that dopamine [ 113 ] and serotonin [ 82 ] play critically important roles in thermoregulation. Hence, drugs that interfere with dopaminergic or serotonergic neurotransmission can interfere with thermoregulation, and both first‐ and second‐generation antipsychotic medications have been associated with thermoregulatory problems, including hyperthermia, hypothermia, and, in the most extreme cases, neuroleptic malignant syndrome [ 114 , 115 ]. Hence, it may be the case that SGAs are less effective in individuals with TSDD, as these agents may further compromise their ability to thermoregulate effectively. Of note, lithium monotherapy, which should be helpful in patients with TSDD, was the next recommended approach by Hobbs et al. [ 3 ] in their treatment algorithm for patients with BP I if two trials of SGAs were ineffective. It is important to emphasize that this second TSDD subtype of USBD is not uncommon, but is almost always missed by clinicians. These children have typically previously received one or more of the following diagnoses: attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity; DMDD; separation anxiety disorder; simple phobias; social phobia; generalized anxiety disorder; ODD; nightmare disorder; and obsessive‐compulsive disorder. Typically (in order of the frequency of their use), they had been prescribed: stimulants (methylphenidate, dextroamphetamine, dexmethylphenidate); antidepressants (fluoxetine, venlafaxine, bupropion): atypical antipsychotics (e.g., APZ, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone); anxiolytics (e.g., clonazepam and lorazepam); mood stabilizers (e.g., lithium, lamotrigine, and valproate), all with minimal benefit [ 25 , 61 ]. TSDD patients were commonly prescribed combinations of psychotropics, most often a stimulant or antidepressant that almost very often worsened the course of illness by increasing cycle frequency or intensifying irritability and aggression, and not infrequently resulted in hospitalization. In contrast to these more conventional approaches used for those with BP‐NOS, Papolos et al. [ 25 , 26 ] describe a different treatment paradigm for those with TSDD, as outlined in Table 3 . It involves lithium for mood stabilization, followed by several approaches to temperature and sleep regulation (including melatonin and clonidine), and then initiation and titration of intranasal ketamine. When this regimen, as augmented by additional cooling measures (such as baths, iced drinks, cold compresses, and ventilating fans) is utilized, severely impaired children can begin to have a good outcome, including the ability to attend regular school, cease fighting with parents, make new friends, and resume a more age‐appropriate developmental trajectory [ 61 , p. 61, 26 , p. 26] as seen in over 10 years of clinical follow‐up observations. Many unanswered questions remain about the TSDD subtype of USBD. Of particular concern is the absence of any RCTs. How common is it in systematic epidemiological studies? Is the efficacy of the reported positive results with lithium, ketamine, clonidine, melatonin, and other cooling techniques unique to TSDD, or would some patients with a more classical BP‐NOS subtype also respond to this paradigm? Does the overt group of physiological clinical signs and associated symptoms suggest that thermoregulation is part of the underlying pathophysiology of the condition [ 113 , p. 117]? Are the effects of ketamine, clonidine, and melatonin related explicitly to direct effects on improving core cooling via heat dissipation, and the question remains as to whether other thermoregulatory manipulations would also be effective? Since the PRS of those with BP‐NOS were as high as those with the different subtypes of the BP spectrum [ 18 ], it would be of considerable interest to determine whether PRS scores in those with TSDD were similarly elevated. A related question is whether individuals with TSDD share some inflammatory markers (such as CRP) and other biological and brain imaging markers seen in those with BP‐NOS and the rest of the BP spectrum [ 116 , p. 119, 117 , p. 121, 118 , p. 122]. There have been many diagnostic challenges, particularly those related to developmental presentations and the changing progression of symptoms and cyclicity over the life cycle. Of the various USBS subtypes, as exemplified by DMDD, which has been ruled out as a BP subtype, we have focused on two discrete, clearly defined syndromes, BP‐NOS and TSDD. 3. Discussion We conclude this systematic review with the disappointing observation that optimal pharmacological treatment of the most widely recognized BP‐NOS subtype of USBD needs significant further study. In contrast, the literature is quite substantial on the effectiveness of FFT and related family‐based psychotherapies [ 51 , 119 , 120 ]. Besides these psychotherapeutic approaches, there is a paucity of data on early pharmacological intervention and prevention [ 57 , 121 ]. With the recognition that the FOH syndrome, as originally designated by Papolos et al. [ 61 ], had the additional elements of prominent thermal dysregulation and marked sleep disturbances that included recurrent, horrific nightmares (as described above and in Figure 3 ), it may now be more appropriate to refer to this syndrome as TSDD. We highlight this second subgroup of those that meet criteria for USBD in this discussion because the TSDD syndrome needs to be more widely recognized and has an unconventional treatment paradigm not recognized for the typical BP‐NOS subgroup. The less well‐recognized TSDD subtype also suffers from a lack of controlled clinical trials, but for these TSDD children, there are robust clinical observations and case series that suggest that very good long‐term outcomes are possible. This is achieved when the rapid cycling mood, energy, and arousal disturbances are addressed with lithium, and when fearfulness, temperature, and sleep dysregulation are treated with intranasal ketamine, melatonin, clonidine, and other practical cooling measures. It is hoped that with wider recognition of the occurrence of the several different subtypes of USBD, including both typical BP‐NOS and the distinct TSDD, it will lead to more systematic study and the conduct of controlled clinical trials to better define optimal treatment approaches to each of these early presentations of BD. Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Peer Review The peer review history for this article is available at https://www.webofscience.com/api/gateway/wos/peer‐review/10.1111/acps.13817 . Supporting information Data S1: Supporting Information. Papolos D. F., Teicher M. H., and Post R. M., “Treatment of Early‐Onset Specified and Unspecified Bipolar Disorders: A Systematic Review and Strategies for Identifying and Managing a Thermally Dysregulated Subtype in Children,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 152, no. 3 (2025): 156–179, 10.1111/acps.13817. Funding: The authors received no specific funding for this work. All listed authors have contributed to the manuscript substantially and have agreed to the final submitted version. Data Availability Statement The data that support the findings of this study are available in Google at https://www.google.com . These data were derived from the following resources available in the public domain: Embase, https://www.elsevier.com/products/embase and PubMed, https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov . References 1. Birmaher B., Axelson D., Goldstein B., et al., “Four‐Year Course of Children and Adolescents With Bipolar Spectrum Disorders: The Course and Outcome of Bipolar Youth (COBY) Study,” American Journal of Psychiatry 166, no. 7 (2009): 795–804, 10.1176/appi.ajp.2009.08101569. 2. Kowatch R. A., Youngstrom E. A., Danielyan A., et al., “Review and Meta‐Analysis of the Phenomenology and Clinical Characteristics of Mania in Children and Adolescents,” Bipolar Disorders 7, no. 6 (2005): 483–496, 10.1111/j.1399-5618.2005.00261.x. 3. Hobbs E., Reed R., Lorberg B., Robb A. S., and Dorfman J., “Psychopharmacological Treatment Algorithms of Manic/Mixed and Depressed Episodes in Pediatric Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 32, no. 10 (2022): 507–521, 10.1089/cap.2022.0035. 4. Ratheesh A., Hett D., Ramain J., et al., “A Systematic Review of Interventions in the Early Course of Bipolar Disorder I or II: A Report of the International Society for Bipolar Disorders Taskforce on Early Intervention,” International Journal of Bipolar Disorders 11, no. 1 (2023): 1. 5. Van Meter A. R., Moreira A. L., and Youngstrom E. A., “Meta‐Analysis of Epidemiologic Studies of Pediatric Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 72, no. 9 (2011): 1250–1256, 10.4088/JCP.10m06290. 6. Merikangas K. R., He J. P., Burstein M., et al., “Lifetime Prevalence of Mental Disorders in U.S. Adolescents: Results From the National Comorbidity Survey Replication–Adolescent Supplement (NCS‐A),” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 49, no. 10 (2010): 980–989, 10.1016/j.jaac.2010.05.017. 7. Bellivier F., Etain B., Malafosse A., et al., “Age at Onset in Bipolar I Affective Disorder in the USA and Europe,” World Journal of Biological Psychiatry 15, no. 5 (2014): 369–376, 10.3109/15622975.2011.639801. 8. Etain B., Aas M., Andreassen O. A., et al., “Childhood Trauma Is Associated With Severe Clinical Characteristics of Bipolar Disorders,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 74, no. 10 (2013): 991–998, 10.4088/JCP.13m08353. 9. Post R. M., Altshuler L. L., Kupka R., et al., “More Childhood Onset Bipolar Disorder in the United States Than Canada or Europe: Implications for Treatment and Prevention,” Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 74 (2017): 204–213, 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.01.022. 10. Leibenluft E., Blair R. J., Charney D. S., and Pine D. S., “Irritability in Pediatric Mania and Other Childhood Psychopathology,” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1008 (2003): 201–218, 10.1196/annals.1301.022. 11. Leibenluft E. and Rich B. A., “Pediatric Bipolar Disorder,” Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 4 (2008): 163–187, 10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.4.022007.141216. 12. Leibenluft E., “Severe Mood Dysregulation, Irritability, and the Diagnostic Boundaries of Bipolar Disorder in Youths,” American Journal of Psychiatry 168, no. 2 (2011): 129–142, 10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.10050766. 13. Dickstein D. P., Towbin K. E., Van Der Veen J. W., et al., “Randomized Double‐Blind Placebo‐Controlled Trial of Lithium in Youths With Severe Mood Dysregulation,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 19, no. 1 (2009): 61–73, 10.1089/cap.2008.044. 14. Biederman J., Martelon M., Faraone S. V., Woodworth K. Y., Spencer T. J., and Wozniak J. R., “Personal and Familial Correlates of Bipolar (BP)‐I Disorder in Children With a Diagnosis of BP‐I Disorder With a Positive Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL)‐Severe Dysregulation Profile: A Controlled Study,” Journal of Affective Disorders 147, no. 1–3 (2013): 164–170, 10.1016/j.jad.2012.10.028. 15. Axelson D., Goldstein B., Goldstein T., et al., “Diagnostic Precursors to Bipolar Disorder in Offspring of Parents With Bipolar Disorder: A Longitudinal Study,” American Journal of Psychiatry 172, no. 7 (2015): 638–646, 10.1176/appi.ajp.2014.14010035. 16. Martinez M. S. and Fristad M. A., “Conversion From Bipolar Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (BP‐NOS) to Bipolar I or II in Youth With Family History as a Predictor of Conversion,” Journal of Affective Disorders 148, no. 2–3 (2013): 431–434, 10.1016/j.jad.2012.06.018. 17. Hafeman D. M., Merranko J., Goldstein T. R., et al., “Assessment of a Person‐Level Risk Calculator to Predict New‐Onset Bipolar Spectrum Disorder in Youth at Familial Risk,” JAMA Psychiatry 74, no. 8 (2017): 841–847, 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.1763. 18. Birmaher B., Hafeman D., Merranko J., et al., “Role of Polygenic Risk Score in the Familial Transmission of Bipolar Disorder in Youth,” JAMA Psychiatry 79, no. 2 (2022): 160–168, 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2021.3700. 19. Axelson D. A., Birmaher B., Findling R. L., et al., “Concerns Regarding the Inclusion of Temper Dysregulation Disorder With Dysphoria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 72, no. 9 (2011): 1257–1262, 10.4088/JCP.10com06220. 20. Carlson G. A., “Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder: Where Did It Come From and Where Is It Going,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 26, no. 2 (2016): 90–93, 10.1089/cap.2016.29102.gca. 21. Blader J. C. and Carlson G. A., “Increased Rates of Bipolar Disorder Diagnoses Among U.S. Child, Adolescent, and Adult Inpatients, 1996‐2004,” Biological Psychiatry 62, no. 2 (2007): 107–114, 10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.11.006. 22. Moreno C., Laje G., Blanco C., Jiang H., Schmidt A. B., and Olfson M., “National Trends in the Outpatient Diagnosis and Treatment of Bipolar Disorder in Youth,” Archives of General Psychiatry 64, no. 9 (2007): 1032–1039, 10.1001/archpsyc.64.9.1032. 23. Mayes S. D., Waxmonsky J. D., Calhoun S. L., and Bixler E. O., “Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder Symptoms and Association With Oppositional Defiant and Other Disorders in a General Population Child Sample,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 26, no. 2 (2016): 101–106, 10.1089/cap.2015.0074. 24. Towbin K., Vidal‐Ribas P., Brotman M. A., et al., “A Double‐Blind Randomized Placebo‐Controlled Trial of Citalopram Adjunctive to Stimulant Medication in Youth With Chronic Severe Irritability,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 59, no. 3 (2020): 350–361, 10.1016/j.jaac.2019.05.015. 25. Papolos D., Frei M., Rossignol D., Mattis S., Hernandez‐Garcia L. C., and Teicher M. H., “Clinical Experience Using Intranasal Ketamine in the Longitudinal Treatment of Juvenile Bipolar Disorder With Fear of Harm Phenotype,” Journal of Affective Disorders 225 (2018): 545–551, 10.1016/j.jad.2017.08.081. 26. Papolos D. F., Teicher M. H., Faedda G. L., Murphy P., and Mattis S., “Clinical Experience Using Intranasal Ketamine in the Treatment of Pediatric Bipolar Disorder/Fear of Harm Phenotype,” Journal of Affective Disorders 147, no. 1–3 (2013): 431–436, 10.1016/j.jad.2012.08.040. 27. Hafeman D. M., Goldstein T. R., Strober M., et al., “Prospectively Ascertained Mania and Hypomania Among Young Adults With Child‐ and Adolescent‐Onset Bipolar Disorder,” Bipolar Disorders 23, no. 5 (2021): 463–473, 10.1111/bdi.13034. 28. Geller B., Tillman R., Bolhofner K., and Zimerman B., “Child Bipolar I Disorder: Prospective Continuity With Adult Bipolar I Disorder; Characteristics of Second and Third Episodes; Predictors of 8‐Year Outcome,” Archives of General Psychiatry 65, no. 10 (2008): 1125–1133, 10.1001/archpsyc.65.10.1125. 29. Geller B., Luby J. L., Joshi P., et al., “A Randomized Controlled Trial of Risperidone, Lithium, or Divalproex Sodium for Initial Treatment of Bipolar I Disorder, Manic or Mixed Phase, in Children and Adolescents,” Archives of General Psychiatry 69, no. 5 (2012): 515–528, 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.1508. 30. Findling R. L., Robb A., McNamara N. K., et al., “Lithium in the Acute Treatment of Bipolar I Disorder: A Double‐Blind, Placebo‐Controlled Study,” Pediatrics 136, no. 5 (2015): 885–894, 10.1542/peds.2015-0743. 31. Birmaher B. and Axelson D., “Course and Outcome of Bipolar Spectrum Disorder in Children and Adolescents: A Review of the Existing Literature,” Development and Psychopathology 18, no. 4 (2006): 1023–1035. 32. Kramlinger K. G. and Post R. M., “Ultra‐Rapid and Ultradian Cycling in Bipolar Affective Illness,” British Journal of Psychiatry 168, no. 3 (1996): 314–323. 33. McNamara R. K., Strawn J. R., Tallman M. J., et al., “Effects of Fish Oil Monotherapy on Depression and Prefrontal Neurochemistry in Adolescents at High Risk for Bipolar I Disorder: A 12‐Week Placebo‐Controlled Proton Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Trial,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 30, no. 5 (2020): 293–305. 34. Findling R. L., Youngstrom E. A., Rowles B. M., et al., “A Double‐Blind and Placebo‐Controlled Trial of Aripiprazole in Symptomatic Youths at Genetic High Risk for Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 27, no. 10 (2017): 864–874. 35. Findling R. L., Frazier T. W., Youngstrom E. A., et al., “Double‐Blind, Placebo‐Controlled Trial of Divalproex Monotherapy in the Treatment of Symptomatic Youth at High Risk for Developing Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 68, no. 5 (2007): 781–788. 36. Joshi G., Petty C., Wozniak J., et al., “A Prospective Open‐Label Trial of Paliperidone Monotherapy for the Treatment of Bipolar Spectrum Disorders in Children and Adolescents,” Psychopharmacology 227, no. 3 (2013): 449–458. 37. Joshi G., Petty C., Wozniak J., et al., “A Prospective Open‐Label Trial of Quetiapine Monotherapy in Preschool and School Age Children With Bipolar Spectrum Disorder,” Journal of Affective Disorders 136, no. 3 (2012): 1143–1153. 38. Joshi G., Wozniak J., Mick E., et al., “A Prospective Open‐Label Trial of Extended‐Release Carbamazepine Monotherapy in Children With Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 20, no. 1 (2010): 7–14. 39. Clayton E. H., Hanstock T. L., Hirneth S. J., Kable C. J., Garg M. L., and Hazell P. L., “Reduced Mania and Depression in Juvenile Bipolar Disorder Associated With Long‐Chain Omega‐3 polyunsaturated Fatty Acid Supplementation,” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 63, no. 8 (2009): 1037–1040. 40. Ghaemi S. N., Shirzadi A. A., Klugman J., Berv D. A., Pardo T. B., and Filkowski M. M., “Is Adjunctive Open‐Label Zonisamide Effective For Bipolar Disorder?” Journal of Affective Disorders 105, no. 1‐3 (2008): 311–314, 10.1016/j.jad.2007.05.011. 41. Soutullo C. A., Díez‐Suárez A., and Figueroa‐Quintana A., “Adjunctive Lamotrigine Treatment for Adolescents With Bipolar Disorder: Retrospective Report of Five Cases,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 16, no. 3 (2006): 357–364. 42. Marchand W. R., Wirth L., and Simon C., “Quetiapine Adjunctive and Monotherapy for Pediatric Bipolar Disorder: A Retrospective Chart Review,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 14, no. 3 (2004): 405–411. 43. Geller B., Tillman R., Bolhofner K., and Zimerman B., “Pharmacological and Non‐Drug Treatment of Child Bipolar I Disorder During Prospective Eight‐Year Follow‐Up,” Bipolar Disorders 12, no. 2 (2010): 164–171. 44. Backstrom B., Rask O., and Knutsson J., “Adolescent and Family‐Focused Cognitive‐Behavioral Therapy for Pediatric Bipolar Disorders: An Open Trial and Individual Trajectories Study in Routine Psychiatric Care,” Child Psychiatry &amp; Human Development (2023): 1–12, 10.1007/s10578-023-01504-1. 45. Miklowitz D. J., Weintraub M. J., Ichinose M. C., et al., “A Randomized Clinical Trial of Technology‐Enhanced Family‐Focused Therapy for Youth in the Early Stages of Mood Disorders,” JAACAP Open 1, no. 2 (2023): 93–104. 46. Weintraub M. J., Schneck C. D., Posta F., et al., “Effects of Family Intervention on Psychosocial Functioning and Mood Symptoms of Youth at High Risk for Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 90, no. 2 (2022): 161. 47. Arman S., Golmohammadi F., Maracy M., and Molaeinezhad M., “Efficacy of Group Cognitive‐behavioral Therapy in Maintenance Treatment and Relapse Prevention for Bipolar Adolescents,” Advanced Biomedical Research 7 (2018): 41. 48. Fristad M. A., Young A. S., Vesco A. T., et al., “A Randomized Controlled Trial of Individual Family Psychoeducational Psychotherapy and Omega‐3 Fatty Acids in Youth with Subsyndromal Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 25, no. 10 (2015): 764–774. 49. Goldstein T. R., Fersch‐Podrat R. K., Rivera M., et al., “Dialectical Behavior Therapy for Adolescents With Bipolar Disorder: Results From a Pilot Randomized Trial,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 25, no. 2 (2015): 140–149, 10.1089/cap.2013.0145. 50. West A. E., Weinstein S. M., Peters A. T., et al., “Child‐ and Family‐Focused Cognitive‐Behavioral Therapy For Pediatric Bipolar Disorder: A Randomized Clinical Trial,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 53, no. 11 (2014): 1168–1178, 10.1016/j.jaac.2014.08.013. 51. Miklowitz D. J., Schneck C. D., Singh M. K., et al., “Early Intervention for Symptomatic Youth at Risk for Bipolar Disorder: A Randomized Trial of Family‐Focused Therapy,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 52, no. 2 (2013): 121–131, 10.1016/j.jaac.2012.10.007. 52. Miklowitz D. J., Axelson D. A., George E. L., et al., “Expressed Emotion Moderates the Effects of Family‐Focused Treatment for Bipolar Adolescents,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 48, no. 6 (2009): 643–651. 53. Miklowitz D. J., “Adjunctive Psychotherapy for Bipolar Disorder: State of the Evidence,” American Journal of Psychiatry 165, no. 11 (2008): 1408–1419. 54. West A. E., Jacobs R. H., Westerholm R., et al., “Child and Family‐Focused Cognitive‐Behavioral Therapy For Pediatric Bipolar Disorder: Pilot Study of Group Treatment Format,” Journal of the Canadian Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 18, no. 3 (2009): 239–246. 55. Kraepelin E., Manic Depressive Insanity and Paranoia, ed. MaryBarclay R. (E.S. Livingstone, 1921). 56. DelBello M. P., Tocco M., Pikalov A., Deng L., and Goldman R., “Tolerability, Safety, and Effectiveness of Two Years of Treatment With Lurasidone in Children and Adolescents With Bipolar Depression,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 31, no. 7 (2021): 494–503, 10.1089/cap.2021.0040. 57. Post R. M., Goldstein B. I., Birmaher B., et al., “Toward Prevention of Bipolar Disorder in At‐Risk Children: Potential Strategies Ahead of the Data,” Journal of Affective Disorders 272 (2020): 508–520, 10.1016/j.jad.2020.03.025. 58. Murphy P. J., Frei M. G., and Papolos D., “Alterations in Skin Temperature and Sleep in the Fear of Harm Phenotype of Pediatric Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of Clinical Medicine 3, no. 3 (2014): 959–971, 10.3390/jcm3030959. 59. Papolos D., Hennen J., and Cockerham M., “Obsessive Fears About Harm to Self or Others and Overt Aggressive Behaviors in Youth Diagnosed With Juvenile‐Onset Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of Affective Disorders 89, no. 1–3 (2005): 99–105, 10.1016/j.jad.2005.08.005. 60. Papolos D., Hennen J., Cockerham M. S., et al., “A Strategy for Identifying Phenotypic Subtypes: Concordance of Symptom Dimensions Between Sibling Pairs Who Met Screening Criteria for a Genetic Linkage Study of Childhood‐Onset Bipolar Disorder Using the Child Bipolar Questionnaire,” Journal of Affective Disorders 99, no. 1–3 (2007): 27–36, 10.1016/j.jad.2006.08.014. 61. Papolos D., Mattis S., Golshan S., et al., “Fear of Harm, a Possible Phenotype of Pediatric Bipolar Disorder: A Dimensional Approach to Diagnosis for Genotyping Psychiatric Syndromes,” Journal of Affective Disorders 118, no. 1–3 (2009): 28–38, 10.1016/j.jad.2009.06.016. 62. Papolos D. F. and Bronsteen A., “Bipolar Disorder in Children: Assessment in General Pediatric Practice,” Current Opinion in Pediatrics 25, no. 3 (2013): 419–426, 10.1097/MOP.0b013e3283600e2a. 63. Papolos D., Hennen J., Cockerham M. S., et al., “The Child Bipolar Questionnaire: A Dimensional Approach to Screening for Pediatric Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of Affective Disorders 95, no. 1–3 (2006): 149–158, 10.1016/j.jad.2006.03.026. 64. Cheng R., Juo S. H., Loth J. E., et al., “Genome‐Wide Linkage Scan in a Large Bipolar Disorder Sample From the National Institute of Mental Health Genetics Initiative Suggests Putative Loci for Bipolar Disorder, Psychosis, Suicide, and Panic Disorder,” Molecular Psychiatry 11, no. 3 (2006): 252–260, 10.1038/sj.mp.4001778. 65. Faraone S. V., Lasky‐Su J., Glatt S. J., Eerdewegh P. V., and Tsuang M. T., “Early Onset Bipolar Disorder: Possible Linkage to Chromosome 9q34,” Bipolar Disorders 8, no. 2 (2006): 144–151, 10.1111/j.1399-5618.2006.00289.x. 66. Geddes J. R., Goodwin G. M., Rendell J., et al., “Lithium Plus Valproate Combination Therapy Versus Monotherapy for Relapse Prevention in Bipolar I Disorder (BALANCE): A Randomised Open‐Label Trial,” Lancet 375, no. 9712 (2010): 385–395, 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61828-6. 67. Grof P., Duffy A., Cavazzoni P., et al., “Is Response to Prophylactic Lithium a Familial Trait?,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 63, no. 10 (2002): 942–947, 10.4088/jcp.v63n1013. 68. Findling R. L., Landersdorfer C. B., Kafantaris V., et al., “First‐Dose Pharmacokinetics of Lithium Carbonate in Children and Adolescents,” Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 30, no. 4 (2010): 404–410, 10.1097/JCP.0b013e3181e66a62. 69. Landersdorfer C. B., Findling R. L., Frazier J. A., Kafantaris V., and Kirkpatrick C. M. J., “Lithium in Paediatric Patients With Bipolar Disorder: Implications for Selection of Dosage Regimens via Population Pharmacokinetics/Pharmacodynamics,” Clinical Pharmacokinetics 56, no. 1 (2017): 77–90, 10.1007/s40262-016-0430-3. 70. Post R. M., “The New News About Lithium: An Underutilized Treatment in the United States,” Neuropsychopharmacology 43, no. 5 (2018): 1174–1179, 10.1038/npp.2017.238. 71. Hashimoto R., Fujimaki K., Jeong M. R., et al., “Neuroprotective Actions of Lithium,” Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi 105, no. 1 (2003): 81–86. 72. Cade J. F., “Lithium Salts in the Treatment of Psychotic Excitement,” Medical Journal of Australia 2, no. 10 (1949): 349–352, 10.1080/j.1440-1614.1999.06241.x. 73. Schou M., Juel‐Nielsen N., Stromgren E., and Voldby H., “The Treatment of Manic Psychoses by the Administration of Lithium Salts,” Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 17, no. 4 (1954): 250–260, 10.1136/jnnp.17.4.250. 74. Ballenger J. C. and Post R. M., “Carbamazepine in Manic‐Depressive Illness: A New Treatment,” American Journal of Psychiatry 137, no. 7 (1980): 782–790, 10.1176/ajp.137.7.782. 75. Wagner K. D., Kowatch R. A., Emslie G. J., et al., “A Double‐Blind, Randomized, Placebo‐Controlled Trial of Oxcarbazepine in the Treatment of Bipolar Disorder in Children and Adolescents,” American Journal of Psychiatry 163, no. 7 (2006): 1179–1186, 10.1176/ajp.2006.163.7.1179. 76. Morrow K., Young K. A., Spencer S., et al., “Utility of Oxcarbazepine in the Treatment of Childhood and Adolescent Psychiatric Symptoms,” Proceedings (Baylor University Medical Center) 34, no. 1 (2020): 34–39, 10.1080/08998280.2020.1826259. 77. Cleveland Clinic , “What's the Best Temperature for Sleep?” 2021, https://health.clevelandclinic.org/what‐is‐the‐ideal‐sleeping‐temperature‐for‐my‐bedroom/#:~:text=%E2%80%9CTypically%20it%20is%20suggested%20that,the%20stability%20of%20REM%20sleep . 78. Krauchi K., Cajochen C., Werth E., et al., “Functional Link Between Distal Vasodilation and Sleep‐Onset Latency?,” American Journal of Physiology. Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology 278, no. 3 (2000): R741–R748, 10.1152/ajpregu.2000.278.3.R741. 79. Muzet A., Ehrhart J., Candas V., Libert J. P., and Vogt J. J., “REM Sleep and Ambient Temperature in Man,” International Journal of Neuroscience 18, no. 1–2 (1983): 117–126, 10.3109/00207458308985885. 80. Arendt J., “Melatonin: Countering Chaotic Time Cues,” Frontiers in Endocrinology (Lausanne) 10 (2019): 391, 10.3389/fendo.2019.00391. 81. Zhao D., Yu Y., Shen Y., et al., “Melatonin Synthesis and Function: Evolutionary History in Animals and Plants,” Frontiers in Endocrinology 10 (2019): 249, 10.3389/fendo.2019.00249. 82. Krauchi K., Cajochen C., Pache M., et al., “Thermoregulatory Effects of Melatonin in Relation to Sleepiness,” Chronobiology International 23, no. 1–2 (2006): 475–484, 10.1080/07420520500545854. 83. Palagini L., Manni R., Aguglia E., et al., “International Expert Opinions and Recommendations on the Use of Melatonin in the Treatment of Insomnia and Circadian Sleep Disturbances in Adult Neuropsychiatric Disorders,” Frontiers in Psychiatry 12 (2021): 688890, 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.688890. 84. Pandi‐Perumal S. R., Srinivasan V., Spence D. W., and Cardinali D. P., “Role of the Melatonin System in the Control of Sleep: Therapeutic Implications,” CNS Drugs 21, no. 12 (2007): 995–1018, 10.2165/00023210-200721120-00004. 85. Arendt J. and Skene D. J., “Melatonin as a Chronobiotic,” Sleep Medicine Reviews 9, no. 1 (2005): 25–39, 10.1016/j.smrv.2004.05.002. 86. Lewy A. J., Wehr T. A., Goodwin F. K., Newsome D. A., and Markey S. P., “Light Suppresses Melatonin Secretion in Humans,” Science 210, no. 4475 (1980): 1267–1269, 10.1126/science.7434030. 87. Rajaratnam S. M., Dijk D. J., Middleton B., Stone B. M., and Arendt J., “Melatonin Phase‐Shifts Human Circadian Rhythms With No Evidence of Changes in the Duration of Endogenous Melatonin Secretion or the 24‐Hour Production of Reproductive Hormones,” Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 88, no. 9 (2003): 4303–4309, 10.1210/jc.2003-030460. 88. Lewy A. J., Bauer V. K., Hasler B. P., Kendall A. R., Pires M. L. N., and Sack R. L., “Capturing the Circadian Rhythms of Free‐Running Blind People With 0.5 mg Melatonin,” Brain Research 918, no. 1–2 (2001): 96–100, 10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02964-x. 89. Lockley S. W., Skene D. J., James K., Thapan K., Wright J., and Arendt J., “Melatonin Administration Can Entrain the Free‐Running Circadian System of Blind Subjects,” Journal of Endocrinology 164, no. 1 (2000): R1–R6, 10.1677/joe.0.164r001. 90. Antipov A., Brizuela M., Blessing W. W., and Ootsuka Y., “Alpha(2)‐Adrenergic Receptor Agonists Prevent Emotional Hyperthermia,” Brain Research 1732 (2020): 146678, 10.1016/j.brainres.2020.146678. 91. Delaunay L., Bonnet F., Liu N., Beydon L., Catoire P., and Sessler D. I., “Clonidine Comparably Decreases the Thermoregulatory Thresholds for Vasoconstriction and Shivering in Humans,” Anesthesiology 79, no. 3 (1993): 470–474, 10.1097/00000542-199309000-00009. 92. Madden C. J., Tupone D., Cano G., and Morrison S. F., “α2 Adrenergic Receptor‐Mediated Inhibition of Thermogenesis,” Journal of Neuroscience 33, no. 5 (2013): 2017–2028, 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4701-12.2013. 93. Nicolaou G., Chen A. A., Johnston C. E., Kenny G. P., Bristow G. K., and Giesbrecht G. G., “Clonidine Decreases Vasoconstriction and Shivering Thresholds, Without Affecting the Sweating Threshold,” Canadian Journal of Anaesthesia = Journal Canadien D'anesthesie 44, no. 6 (1997): 636–642, 10.1007/BF03015448. 94. Barrett J. R., Tracy D. K., and Giaroli G., “To Sleep or Not to Sleep: A Systematic Review of the Literature of Pharmacological Treatments of Insomnia in Children and Adolescents With Attention‐Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 23, no. 10 (2013): 640–647, 10.1089/cap.2013.0059. 95. Dollfus S., “Indications for Clonidine in Child Psychiatry,” Encephale 19, no. 2 (1993): 83–87. 96. Nakamura K., “Neural Circuit for Psychological Stress‐Induced Hyperthermia,” Temperature (Austin, Tex) 2, no. 3 (2015): 352–361, 10.1080/23328940.2015.1070944. 97. Kataoka N., Hioki H., Kaneko T., and Nakamura K., “Psychological Stress Activates a Dorsomedial Hypothalamus‐Medullary Raphe Circuit Driving Brown Adipose Tissue Thermogenesis and Hyperthermia,” Cell Metabolism 20, no. 2 (2014): 346–358, 10.1016/j.cmet.2014.05.018. 98. Matuszek M., Szreder Z., and Korolkiewicz Z., “Effects of Prazosin on Metabolism and Body Temperature in Normothermic Rabbits,” Polish Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacy 38, no. 5–6 (1986): 417–423. 99. Olivier B., “Psychogenic Fever, Functional Fever, or Psychogenic Hyperthermia?,” Temperature (Austin) 2, no. 3 (2015): 324–325, 10.1080/23328940.2015.1071701. 100. Hashimoto R., Fujimaki K., Jeong M. R., et al., “Neuroprotective Actions of Lithium,” Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi 105, no. 1 (2003): 81–86. 101. “Esketamine Nasal Spray (Spravato) for Treatment‐Resistant Depression,” Medical Letter on Drugs and Therapeutics 61, no. 1569 (2019): 54–57. 102. Fahim I., Ismail M., and Osman O. H., “Role of 5‐Hydroxytryptamine in Ketamine‐Induced Hypothermia in the Rat,” British Journal of Pharmacology 48, no. 4 (1973): 570–576. 103. Pietersen C. Y., Bosker F. J., Postema F., et al., “Ketamine Administration Disturbs Behavioural and Distributed Neural Correlates of Fear Conditioning in the Rat,” Progress in Neuro‐Psychopharmacology &amp; Biological Psychiatry 30, no. 7 (2006): 1209–1218, 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2006.02.019. 104. Vučković S. M., Savić Vujović K. R., Srebro D. P., et al., “Synergistic Interaction Between Ketamine and Magnesium in Lowering Body Temperature in Rats,” Physiology &amp; Behavior 127 (2014): 45–53, 10.1016/j.physbeh.2014.01.006. 105. Krauchi K. and Deboer T., “The Interrelationship Between Sleep Regulation and Thermoregulation,” Frontiers in Bioscience (Landmark Ed) 15 (2010): 604–625. 106. Li D., Fang P., Liu H., et al., “The Clinical Effect of Blue Light Therapy on Patients With Delayed Sleep‐Wake Phase Disorder,” Nature and Science of Sleep 14 (2022): 75–82, 10.2147/NSS.S344616. 107. Wahl S., Engelhardt M., Schaupp P., Lappe C., and Ivanov I. V., “The Inner Clock‐Blue Light Sets the Human Rhythm,” Journal of Biophotonics 12, no. 12 (2019): e201900102, 10.1002/jbio.201900102. 108. Vanuk J. R., Pace‐Schott E. F., Bullock A., Esbit S., Dailey N. S., and Killgore W. D. S., “Morning Blue Light Treatment Improves Sleep Complaints, Symptom Severity, and Retention of Fear Extinction Memory in Post‐Traumatic Stress Disorder,” Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 16 (2022): 886816, 10.3389/fnbeh.2022.886816. 109. Killgore W. D. S., Vanuk J. R., and Dailey N. S., “Treatment With Morning Blue Light Increases Left Amygdala Volume and Sleep Duration Among Individuals With Posttraumatic Stress Disorder,” Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 16 (2022): 910239, 10.3389/fnbeh.2022.910239. 110. Ishizawa M., Uchiumi T., Takahata M., Yamaki M., and Sato T., “Effects of Pre‐Bedtime Blue‐Light Exposure on Ratio of Deep Sleep in Healthy Young Men,” Sleep Medicine 84 (2021): 303–307, 10.1016/j.sleep.2021.05.046. 111. Golden R. N., Gaynes B. N., Ekstrom R. D., et al., “The Efficacy of Light Therapy in the Treatment of Mood Disorders: A Review and Meta‐Analysis of the Evidence,” American Journal of Psychiatry 162, no. 4 (2005): 656–662, 10.1176/appi.ajp.162.4.656. 112. Danilenko K. V. and Ivanova I. A., “Dawn Simulation vs. Bright Light in Seasonal Affective Disorder: Treatment Effects and Subjective Preference,” Journal of Affective Disorders 180 (2015): 87–89, 10.1016/j.jad.2015.03.055. 113. Lee T. F., Mora F., and Myers R. D., “Dopamine and Thermoregulation: An Evaluation With Special Reference to Dopaminergic Pathways,” Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 9, no. 4 (1985): 589–598, 10.1016/0149-7634(85)90005-3. 114. Velamoor R., “Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome: A Neuro‐Psychiatric Emergency: Recognition, Prevention, and Management,” Asian Journal of Psychiatry 29 (2017): 106–109, 10.1016/j.ajp.2017.05.004. 115. Zonnenberg C., Bueno‐de‐Mesquita J. M., Ramlal D., and Blom J. D., “Hypothermia due to Antipsychotic Medication: A Systematic Review,” Frontiers in Psychiatry 8 (2017): 165, 10.3389/fpsyt.2017.00165. 116. Leboyer M., Foiselle M., Tchitchek N., et al., “Low‐Dose Interleukin‐2 in Patients With Bipolar Depression: A Phase 2 Randomised Double‐Blind Placebo‐Controlled Trial,” Brain, Behavior, and Immunity 123 (2025): 177–184. 117. Strawbridge R., Tsapekos D., and Young A. H., “Circulating Inflammatory and Neurotrophic Markers as Moderators and/or Mediators of Cognitive Remediation Outcome in People With Bipolar Disorders,” BJPsych Open 10, no. 6 (2024): e225. 118. Wang T. Y., Chang Y. H., Lee S. Y., et al., “Transdiagnostic Features of Inflammatory Markers and Executive Function Across Psychiatric Disorders,” Journal of Psychiatric Research 181 (2025): 160–168. 119. Miklowitz D. J. and Chung B., “Family‐Focused Therapy for Bipolar Disorder: Reflections on 30 Years of Research,” Family Process 55, no. 3 (2016): 483–499, 10.1111/famp.12237. 120. Petrowski K., Buhrer S., Albus C., et al., “Increase in Cortisol Concentration due to Standardized Bright and Blue Light Exposure on Saliva Cortisol in the Morning Following Sleep Laboratory,” Stress 24, no. 3 (2021): 331–337, 10.1080/10253890.2020.1803265. 121. Post R. M., Yatham L. N., Vieta E., Berk M., and Nierenberg A. A., “Beyond Evidence‐Based Treatment of Bipolar Disorder: Rational Pragmatic Approaches to Management,” Bipolar Disorders 21, no. 7 (2019): 650–659, 10.1111/bdi.12813. Associated Data Supplementary Materials Data S1: Supporting Information. Data Availability Statement The data that support the findings of this study are available in Google at https://www.google.com . These data were derived from the following resources available in the public domain: Embase, https://www.elsevier.com/products/embase and PubMed, https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov .