3569 hscirep Health Science Reports Health Sci Rep Wiley PMC12174664 12174664 12174664 40535521 10.1002/hsr2.70929 Effect of Social Activity on All‐Cause Dementia Among South Korean Elders: A Retrospective Cohort Study Jeong Wonseok 1 Jeong Wonjeong 2 Kim Seungju 3 ✉ 1 Division Department of Public Health, Graduate School, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 Cancer Knowledge and Information Center, National Cancer Control Institute, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea 3 Department of Health System, College of Nursing, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea * Correspondence: Seungju Kim ( seungju.phd@gmail.com ) ✉ Corresponding author. 18 6 2025 8 6 e70929 e70929 18 6 2025 © 2025 The Author(s). Health Science Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC. This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. ABSTRACT Background and Aims Dementia leads to substantial social and economic impacts in older adults. Due to the unprecedented rate of population aging, the number of dementia cases has increased in South Korea. Managing risk factors is crucial for delaying or preventing the progression of dementia, as existing treatments have uncertain effectiveness. Despite the importance of health behaviors in maintaining cognitive function and the well‐known association between cognitive decline and dementia, research regarding preventive health behaviors for dementia is limited. Therefore, this study aimed to examine the effects of social activity on dementia in older South Koreans. Methods Data from the 2018 and 2020 Korean Longitudinal Study of Ageing ( n = 6156 older Koreans) were included in this study. Social activity was the primary independent variable. The dependent variable was the presence of Alzheimer's or vascular dementia or dementia due to brain tumors or hypothyroidism. A Cox proportional hazards regression analysis was performed. Results Individuals who did not participate in any social activities had a significantly higher risk of developing dementia than those who were socially active (hazard ratio: 2.36; 95% confidence interval = 1.29–4.32). Younger participants exhibited a lower risk of dementia than participants &gt; 75 years of age. The beneficial effects of social activity were more pronounced among urban participants. Conclusion Engagement in at least one social activity significantly reduced the risk of dementia among older adults. These data will be helpful for the formulation of future public health policies and preventive strategies in Korea. Keywords: Alzheimer's disease, dementia, gerontology, social activity status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Revised 2025 May 12; Received 2024 Nov 15; Accepted 2025 May 20; Collection date 2025 Jun. 1. Introduction Dementia, characterized by a decline in memory and cognitive function, is one of the most challenging mental health issues in the older population [ 1 , 2 ]. Due to a diminished capacity to conduct daily activities, patients with dementia place considerable social and economic strain on their families and societies [ 3 ]. Caregivers often devote between 3 and 6 h per day supporting individuals with dementia, facing a myriad of challenges as they attempt to balance the demands of caregiving with other life responsibilities, such as child‐rearing, career progression, and sustaining personal relationships [ 4 ]. Therefore, caregiving may lead to decreased participation in economic activities and an increased risk of serious health complications when sustained for long periods [ 5 ]. The prevalence of dementia in South Korea has recently increased due to the unprecedented rate of population aging [ 4 ]. South Korea transitioned into an aged society in 2017, and projections indicate that it will advance further into a super‐aged society by 2025 [ 5 ]. As estimated in a previous study, 40.4% of Koreans will be aged 65 years or older by 2050 if the current rate of population aging continues [ 6 ]. Consequently, an increasing trend in the prevalence of dementia seems inevitable, and the Korean Ministry of Health and Welfare estimates that the prevalence of dementia will reach 15% by 2050 [ 7 ]. Despite the increasing prevalence of dementia, the efficacy of dementia treatment in advanced stages remains limited [ 8 ]. Therefore, investigation and appropriate risk factor management have become even more critical to delay or prevent the progression of dementia among older patients. Dementia is closely associated with various diseases, including hypertension, diabetes, and metabolic syndrome, indicating the possibility of prevention through medication [ 9 , 10 , 11 ]. Despite the well‐known association between cognitive decline and dementia, there has been limited research regarding preventive health behaviors that can reduce the risk of dementia [ 12 , 13 ]. While some studies have demonstrated that physical activity can lower dementia risk, the impact of social engagement remains underexplored [ 14 ]. In fact, social activities may contribute to cognitive resilience by providing emotional support, reducing stress, and offering cognitive stimulation through interpersonal interactions [ 15 ]. The crucial role of health behaviors in preserving cognitive function is prominent, as older adults who participate in social activities fail fewer cognitive tasks than those who do not [ 16 ]. Therefore, this study investigates the potential association between dementia and participation in social activities, including religious gatherings, social gatherings, leisure gatherings, nongovernmental organizations, and volunteer groups. This study examined the association between social activity and all‐cause dementia in older Korean patients by analyzing the rate of dementia among individuals who participated in social activity and that of those who did not. 2. Materials and Methods 2.1. Data and Study Participants This study included a sample of the seventh‐ and eighth‐wave data (2018 and 2020) of the Korean Longitudinal Study of Ageing (KLoSA), which were collected every even‐numbered year. The KLoSA is an ongoing longitudinal panel survey conducted by the Korea Labor Institute to collect the basic data needed to devise and implement effective social and economic policies that address emerging trends related to population aging [ 17 ]. To ensure national representation, Koreans aged ≥ 45 years who reside in households were randomly selected using a multistage stratified probability sampling approach based on province and housing type [ 18 ]. The data obtained for this study were approved by Statistics Korea (approval number 33602) and obtained following the receipt of written informed consent from the participants in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. As the data are accessible to the public for scientific purposes and contain deidentified information, the current study did not require ethical clearance [ 18 ]. Data from the baseline survey conducted in 2018 and the dementia panel conducted in 2020 were included in this study. Of the 6940 individuals included in the baseline study, those with dementia or mild cognitive impairment were excluded from this analysis. Among the remaining 6240 participants, those who did not participate until the endpoint (2020) were also excluded. After excluding individuals with missing diagnosis dates for dementia and missing data regarding covariates such as drinking status, social activity, and depression, the data of 6156 participants were analyzed in the current study. 2.2. Variables The primary independent variable in this study was participation in social activity, including religious gatherings, social gatherings such as friendship groups and senior centers, leisure, cultural, or sports‐related groups, alumni associations, volunteer activities, and participation in political parties, civic organizations, or interest groups. Participants who engaged in at least one social activity were classified as “yes”, and those who did not participate were classified as “no”. Participant age (55−65 years, 65−75 years, and ≥ 75 years), sex, and marital status (married and unmarried or separated) data were collected. Socioeconomic variables included the participants' educational level (elementary school or lower, middle school, high school, college or higher), region (urban or rural), and household income quartiles (1: low; 2: lower middle; 3: upper middle; 4: high). Participants currently living in any of the metropolitan cities of Korea (Gwangyeoksi) or Seoul were classified as “urban”, and those living in any other place were classified as “rural”. Health‐related characteristics included participants' current drinking status (yes or no), regular exercise at least once a week (yes or no), current smoking status (yes or no), depression (yes or no), vision impairment (yes or no), hearing loss (yes or no), and body mass index (obese or normal). Participants who were taking antidepressants at the time of the study or had reported experiencing depressive symptoms for at least two consecutive weeks were categorized as “yes” for depression. Obesity was defined as a body mass index ≥ 25 kg/m² [ 19 ]. Drinking status was categorized as “yes” for participants who reported occasionally or frequently consuming any type of alcoholic beverages and “no” for those who did not. Regular exercise was defined as engaging in physical activity at least once per week, regardless of the type or intensity of exercise, based on participants' responses. Vision impairment and hearing loss were defined as “yes” for participants who reported experiencing difficulties in performing daily activities due to vision or hearing problems, respectively. The term “difficulties in daily activities” refers to any self‐perceived limitations in routine tasks because of visual or auditory challenges. Dementia was defined as that diagnosed by a doctor, including Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia, and dementia due to brain tumors or hypothyroidism. 2.3. Statistical Analysis χ 2 tests were used to analyze the general characteristics of the study population. A Cox proportional hazards regression analysis was used to examine the associations between dementia and social activity, after accounting for potential confounding variables, including demographic, socioeconomic, and health‐related characteristics. Subgroup analyses based on the participants' region of residence were also conducted. Survival time was defined as the period from baseline (January 2018) to the date when dementia was diagnosed. As the diagnosis dates were recorded only by year and month, the 15th day was consistently used as the specific day for all calculations. The results are reported as adjusted hazard ratios (HR) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Statistical significance was set at p &lt; 0.05 using two‐sided tests. All data analyses were conducted using SAS software (version 9.4; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). 3. Results A total of 6940 participants were included in this study, though the data of 6156 participants (42.3% male; 57.7% female) were analyzed after the exclusion criteria were applied (Table 1 ). Of the 6156 participants, 50 (0.8%) developed dementia within 2 years. A total of 79.6% of the study participants were involved in at least one social activity. After accounting for potential confounders, Individuals who participated in at least one social activity had a lower risk of all‐cause dementia than those who did not (HR = 2.36, 95% CI = 1.29–4.32) (Table 2 ). Participants aged 55–65 years or 65–75 years had significantly lower risks of dementia than those &gt; 75 years of age (55–65 years: HR = 0.04, 95% CI = 0.69–0.93; 65–75 years: HR = 0.79, 95% CI = 0.71–0.88). The impact of social activity on the risk of dementia varied significantly between rural and urban areas (Table 3 ). In rural areas, older individuals engaged in at least one social activity had a significantly reduced risk of dementia (entire study population: HR = 2.36, 95% CI = 1.29–4.32; rural participants: HR = 3.48, 95% CI = 1.32–9.26). However, while social activity had a positive effect on the risk of dementia among older adults from urban areas, this impact was not statistically significant. Table 4 presents the results of robustness checks for our estimates of the effect of social activity on dementia. We re‐estimated the multivariable Cox regression models using a continuous explanatory variable representing the number of social activities in which participants engaged. The results indicate that with each additional social activity participated in, the risk of all‐cause dementia decreased significantly (HR = 0.51; 95% CI: 0.30–0.86) (Table 4 ). 4. Discussion Due to the lack of authoritative information regarding health behaviors that are preventative for dementia, older individuals often focus solely on medical treatments for related conditions, such as autoimmune diseases, heart disease, and amyloids [ 20 , 21 , 22 ]. Therefore, in this study, the associations between social activity and all‐cause dementia were examined using demographic, socioeconomic, and health‐related variables obtained from the 2018 and 2020 KLoSA data sets. A significant association between participation in social activities and a decreased risk of dementia was observed. The protective effect of physical activity on dementia has been well established in numerous studies [ 14 , 23 , 24 ]. A systematic review of 47 cohort studies found that individuals with higher levels of physical activity had a reduced risk of cognitive decline and dementia compared to those with lower activity levels [ 14 ]. In contrast, the role of social activity in dementia prevention remains relatively underexplored. Social engagement may reduce dementia risk through distinct mechanisms, such as providing emotional support, alleviating psychological stress, and stimulating cognitive function through interpersonal interactions [ 15 ]. Several studies have highlighted the potential cognitive benefits of social participation. For instance, one study found that individuals with fewer group‐based social activities were significantly more likely to experience cognitive decline [ 25 ]. Similarly, another study reported that a socially isolated group of older adults experienced a greater incidence of cognitive decline, poorer cognitive function, and depression scores [ 26 ]. Consistent with these findings, the present study found that individuals who did not participate in social activities had a higher risk of developing dementia (HR = 2.36), and the association remained statistically significant after adjusting for covariates such as smoking status, marital status, depression, diabetes, and age. The results of this study highlight the potentially harmful effects of a lack of social interaction on dementia, presenting a clear and novel benefit for older people to engage in social activities. The prevalence of dementia increases with age; the incidence of early‐onset dementia is 0.24 per 1000 person‐years, while the incidence of late‐onset dementia is 5.91 per 1000 person‐years in South Korea [ 27 ]. Primary cognitive changes associated with aging involve decreased performance in tasks requiring rapid information processing or decision making, such as speed of processing, working memory, and executive function [ 28 ]. Due to the impact of age on cognitive decline, several studies have identified age as the main risk factor for dementia [ 29 , 30 ]. The current study also confirmed a strong correlation between age and the risk of dementia. Participants aged 55–65 years had the lowest risk of dementia, and those aged 65–75 years had significantly lower risks compared to those &gt; 75 years of age. The subgroup analysis in this study indicated that the effects of social activity on dementia risk vary between participants from rural and urban areas. Living in rural areas was associated with a reduced risk of dementia. This effect was even more pronounced than that observed in the overall population. However, living in urban areas did not significantly affect the risk of dementia, which is consistent with the findings of previous studies, suggesting that the social dynamics differ between rural and urban settings. Older individuals in rural areas tend to interact more frequently with close neighbors than those in larger cities, indicating that bonding social capital plays a more crucial role in rural communities [ 31 ]. In addition, trust levels among neighbors and perceptions of social networks are generally more favorable in rural areas than in large cities. This higher prevalence and significance of bonding social capital in rural areas support the findings of our subgroup analysis, highlighting the stronger impact of social activity on reducing dementia risk in these regions. Another study reported regional differences in the frequency with which older Korean individuals meet with their children [ 32 ]. Specifically, 25.2% of older people living in large cities meet with their children more than once a week, compared to only 20.0% in rural areas. The lower frequency of family interactions in rural settings may render community‐based social activities more vital for mental health and social support, thus directly mitigating the risk of dementia among these populations. Therefore, the importance of active participation in social activities is even more prominent among older individuals living in rural areas. This study has several limitations. First, despite using both participant surveys and health professionals' assessments of medical and biological conditions in the KLoSA, there is a possibility of recall bias or misinterpretation by participants during the interviews. This bias could lead to random misclassification and bias towards null values, potentially affecting the accuracy and reliability of the study. Therefore, these results should be interpreted with caution. Second, the definition of dementia relied on self‐reported physician diagnoses based on the survey question, which did not differentiate between dementia subtypes or specify diagnostic procedures. This may have introduced misclassification and heterogeneity, as both neurodegenerative and potentially reversible forms of dementia could have been included. Third, due to the limitations of the data set, the study period lasted only 2 years. The duration of the study may have been insufficient for the symptoms to fully manifest in the mid‐life population. Lastly, all potential risks or confounding factors may not have been accounted for in our analysis, as the database did not contain relevant information regarding several important variables. Missing data of potential confounding factors, such as family history of dementia, medications, and oxidative stress levels, could limit the accuracy and comprehensiveness of the findings. Despite these limitations, this study has several strengths. The KLoSA is conducted by a national institution based on a multistage stratified probability sampling approach; therefore, the data are statistically reliable and representative compared to surveys performed by private institutions. Moreover, the use of variables developed from longitudinal data enhances the ability to establish cause and effect and determine the direction of relationships more accurately than those developed using cross‐sectional data. Furthermore, this is one of the few studies that included all types of dementia as outcomes. Finally, this study highlights the need for preventive health behaviors instead of medications for related diseases, which may often be underestimated. 5. Conclusions There is insufficient information regarding health behaviors and dementia. This study identified a relationship between participation in social activities and the prevalence of all‐cause dementia. Individuals who did not participate in any social activity were more likely to develop dementia than those who participated in social activities. Considering the limited effectiveness of dementia treatments, a full understanding of the associated risk factors may help identify preventive measures. Author Contributions Wonseok Jeong: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, and writing – original draft. Wonjeong Jeong: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, investigation, and methodology. Seungju Kim: resources, supervision, and validation. Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Transparency Statement The corresponding author, Seungju Kim, affirms that this manuscript is an honest, accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported; that no important aspects of the study have been omitted; and that any discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant, registered) have been explained. Acknowledgments This study was supported by the National Cancer Center Grant (2511622‐1). The funding sources did not have interventions on the study design and data interpretation. Wonseok Jeong and Wonjeong Jeong contributed equally to this study. Data Availability Statement The KLoSA data are publicly available and downloadable from the employment survey site and nationally representative sample cohort studies, including anthropometric and psychosocial data. The data analyzed in the current study are available at: https://survey.keis.or.kr/eng/klosa/databoard/List.jsp . Data are available in a public, open access repository. The data used in this study are available at [data set] Korea Employment Information Service. Korean Longitudinal study of Elderly Employment 2022 (Available from: https://survey.keis.or.kr/eng/klosa/databoard/List.jsp ). References 1. Lee D. Y., Lee J. H., Ju Y. S., et al., “The Prevalence of Dementia in Older People in an Urban Population of Korea: The Seoul Study,” Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 50 (2002): 1233–1239. 2. Park J.‐H., Eum J.‐H., Bold B., and Cheong H.‐K., “Burden of Disease Due to Dementia in the Elderly Population of Korea: Present and Future,” BMC Public Health 13 (2013): 293. 3. Stuck A. E., Walthert J. M., Nikolaus T., Büla C. J., Hohmann C., and Beck J. C., “Risk Factors for Functional Status Decline in Community‐Living Elderly People: A Systematic Literature Review,” Social Science &amp; Medicine 48 (1999): 445–469. 4. Kim S. H. and Han S. H., “Prevalence of Dementia Among the South Korean Population,” Journal of Korean Diabetes 13 (2012): 124–128. 5. Baek J. Y., Lee E., Jung H.‐W., and Jang I.‐Y., “Geriatrics Fact Sheet in Korea 2021,” Annals of Geriatric Medicine and Research 25 (2021): 65–71. 6. Jang I.‐Y., Lee H. Y., and Lee E., “Geriatrics Fact Sheet in Korea 2018 From National Statistics,” Annals of Geriatric Medicine and Research 23 (2019): 50–53. 7. Choi Y. J., Kim S., Hwang Y. J., and Kim C., “Prevalence of Dementia in Korea Based on Hospital Utilization Data From 2008 to 2016,” Yonsei Medical Journal 62 (2021): 948. 8. Park K. M., Sung J. M., Kim W. J., et al., “Population‐Based Dementia Prediction Model Using Korean Public Health Examination Data: A Cohort Study,” PLoS One 14 (2019): e0211957. 9. Small G. W., “Differential Diagnosis and Early Detection of Dementia,” American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 6 (1998): S26–S33. 10. Chu L. W., “Alzheimer's Disease: Early Diagnosis and Treatment,” Hong Kong Medical Journal 18 (2012): 228–237. 11. Yu J. H., Han K., Park S., et al., “Incidence and Risk Factors for Dementia in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Nationwide Population‐Based Study in Korea,” Diabetes &amp; Metabolism Journal 44 (2020): 113–124. 12. Yoon M., Yang P.‐S., Jin M.‐N., et al., “Association of Physical Activity Level With Risk of Dementia in a Nationwide Cohort in Korea,” JAMA Network Open 4 (2021): e2138526. 13. Lee Y., Back J. H., Kim J., et al., “Systematic Review of Health Behavioral Risks and Cognitive Health in Older Adults,” International Psychogeriatrics 22 (2010): 174–187. 14. Blondell S. J., Hammersley‐Mather R., and Veerman J. L., “Does Physical Activity Prevent Cognitive Decline and Dementia?: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis of Longitudinal Studies,” BMC Public Health 14 (2014): 510. 15. Kelly M. E., Duff H., Kelly S., et al., “The Impact of Social Activities, Social Networks, Social Support and Social Relationships on the Cognitive Functioning of Healthy Older Adults: A Systematic Review,” Systematic Reviews 6 (2017): 259. 16. Glei D. A., Landau D. A., Goldman N., Chuang Y.‐L., Rodríguez G., and Weinstein M., “Participating in Social Activities Helps Preserve Cognitive Function: An Analysis of a Longitudinal, Population‐Based Study of the Elderly,” International Journal of Epidemiology 34 (2005): 864–871. 17. Lee H. K. and Lee S. H., “Depression, Diabetes, and Healthcare Utilization: Results From the Korean Longitudinal Study of Aging (KLoSA),” Iranian Journal of Public Health 43 (2014): 6. 18. Lee T. W., Chung J., Song K., and Kim E., “Incidence and Predictors of Multimorbidity Among Older Adults in Korea: A 10‐Year Cohort Study,” BMC Geriatrics 22 (2022): 565. 19. Jeong W. and Jang S.‐I., “Associations Between Meal Companions and Obesity in South Korean Adults,” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17 (2020): 2697. 20. Justin B. N., Turek M., and Hakim A. M., “Heart Disease as a Risk Factor for Dementia,” Clinical Epidemiology 5 (2013): 135–145. 21. Gomperts S. N., Locascio J. J., Rentz D., et al., “Amyloid Is Linked to Cognitive Decline in Patients With Parkinson Disease Without Dementia,” Neurology 80 (2013): 85–91. 22. Wotton C. J. and Goldacre M. J., “Associations Between Specific Autoimmune Diseases and Subsequent Dementia: Retrospective Record‐Linkage Cohort Study, UK,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 71 (2017): 576–583. 23. Laurin D., Verreault R., Lindsay J., MacPherson K., and Rockwood K., “Physical Activity and Risk of Cognitive Impairment and Dementia in Elderly Persons,” Archives of Neurology 58 (2001): 498–504. 24. Kouloutbani K., Karteroliotis K., and Politis A., “The Effect of Physical Activity on Dementia,” Psychiatriki 30 (2019): 142–155. 25. Kim D., Arai H., and Kim S., “Social Activities Are Associated With Cognitive Decline in Older Koreans,” Geriatrics &amp; Gerontology International 17 (2017): 1191–1196. 26. Yang J. M., Kim J. H., and Hwang J. E., “Effect of Intensity of Persistent Social Isolation on Mental Health in the Late Middle‐Aged and Older Population: Results of the Korea Longitudinal Study of Ageing (2006–2020),” Psychogeriatrics 24 (2024): 391–403. 27. Hwangbo S., Lee J. Y., Han G., et al., “Dementia Incidence and Population‐Attributable Fraction for Dementia Risk Factors in Republic of Korea: A 12‐Year Longitudinal Follow‐Up Study of a National Cohort,” Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 15 (2023): 1126587. 28. Murman D., “The Impact of Age on Cognition,” Seminars in Hearing 36 (2015): 111–121. 29. Mecocci P. and Boccardi V., “The Impact of Aging in Dementia: It Is Time to Refocus Attention on the Main Risk Factor of Dementia,” Ageing Research Reviews 65 (2021): 101210. 30. Chen J.‐H., Lin K.‐P., and Chen Y.‐C., “Risk Factors for Dementia,” Journal of the Formosan Medical Association 108 (2009): 754–764. 31. Ha S.‐kyu and Park K., “Influencing Factors in Social Capital and Regeneration of Residential Communities: Comparative Study on Housing Estates in Seoul and Rural Village in Yeoju,” Journal of Local Government Studies in Korea 12 (2011): 133–153. 32. Kim C., Chang E. J., and Kim C., “Regional Differences in the Effects of Social Relations on Depression Among Korean Elderly and the Moderating Effect of Living Alone,” Journal of Preventive Medicine and Public Health 54 (2021): 441–450. Associated Data Data Availability Statement The KLoSA data are publicly available and downloadable from the employment survey site and nationally representative sample cohort studies, including anthropometric and psychosocial data. The data analyzed in the current study are available at: https://survey.keis.or.kr/eng/klosa/databoard/List.jsp . Data are available in a public, open access repository. The data used in this study are available at [data set] Korea Employment Information Service. Korean Longitudinal study of Elderly Employment 2022 (Available from: https://survey.keis.or.kr/eng/klosa/databoard/List.jsp ).