4549 alzdem Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia Alzheimers Dement Wiley PMC12331443 12331443 12331443 40775676 10.1002/alz.70560 The role of diet in moderating the relationship between symptoms of depression and brain amyloid load Al Shamsi Hilal Salim Said 1 Gardener Samantha L 1 2 3 Rainey‐Smith Stephanie R 1 2 3 4 5 Sohrabi Hamid R 1 2 4 6 Taddei Kevin 1 2 Masters Colin L 7 Doré Vincent 7 8 Rowe Christopher 8 9 Fernando W M A D Binosha 1 2 ✉ Martins Ralph N 1 2 4 6 for the AIBL Research Group # 1 Centre of Excellence for Alzheimer's Disease Research and Care, School of Medical and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan University, Bentley, Western Australia, Australia 2 Alzheimer's Research Australia, Ralph and Patricia Sarich Neuroscience Research Institute, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia 3 Lifestyle Approaches Towards Cognitive Health Research Group, Murdoch University, Murdoch, Western Australia, Australia 4 Centre for Healthy Ageing, Health Futures Institute, Murdoch University, Murdoch, Western Australia, Australia 5 School of Psychological Science, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia 6 Department of Biomedical Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia 7 Department of Health and Biosecurity Flagship, The Australian eHealth Research Centre, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Parkville, Victoria, Australia 8 Department of Molecular Imaging, Austin Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia 9 The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia * Correspondence , W. M. A. D. B. Fernando, Centre of Excellence for Alzheimer's Disease Research and Care, School of Medical and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan University, 270 Joondalup Drive, Joondalup, 6027 Western Australia, Australia. Email: w.fernando@ecu.edu.au # http://www.aibl.csiro.au (for a full list of the AIBL Research Group). ✉ Corresponding author. 7 8 2025 21 8 e70560 e70560 8 8 2025 © 2025 The Author(s). Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's Association. This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Abstract BACKGROUND Healthy lifestyle factors, including diet, may affect brain amyloid beta (Aβ) load. This study examines dietary patterns as moderators of the relationships among symptoms of depression, anxiety, and brain Aβ load. METHOD A cross‐sectional study of cognitively unimpaired older adults ( n = 524) from the Australian Imaging, Biomarkers, and Lifestyle study assessed dietary patterns, depressive and anxiety symptoms, and brain Aβ load. Moderation and simple slope analyses were conducted. RESULTS The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet moderated the relationship between depressive and anxiety symptoms and brain Aβ load. Higher symptoms were associated with greater Aβ load in individuals with lower DASH adherence. This effect was also observed for anxiety symptoms in apolipoprotein E ε4 carriers. The Mediterranean and Western diets did not moderate these relationships. CONCLUSION The DASH diet adherence may mitigate the impact of depressive and anxiety symptoms on brain Aβ load, supporting genotype‐specific dietary interventions in mental and brain health. Highlights The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet moderates the links among depression, anxiety, and brain amyloid load. Higher symptoms were linked to greater amyloid load in those with low DASH adherence. This effect was observed for anxiety symptoms in apolipoprotein E ε4 allele carriers. Mediterranean and Western diets did not moderate these relationships. Findings support genotype‐specific dietary interventions for brain and mental health. Keywords: Alzheimer's disease, amyloid beta, anxiety, depression, dietary patterns status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Revised 2025 Jun 12; Received 2025 Mar 7; Accepted 2025 Jun 15; Collection date 2025 Aug. 1. BACKGROUND Depression and anxiety, prevalent mental health conditions, are both potential risk factors and symptoms of Alzheimer's disease (AD), possibly accelerating disease progression. 1 , 2 , 3 Although the exact mechanisms remain unclear, several have been proposed. 4 , 5 , 6 AD is characterized by amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques and tau tangles, which damage neurons in key areas of the brain that regulate mood, such as the amygdala and prefrontal cortex, potentially triggering anxiety and depressive symptoms. 7 AD also disrupts the stress response system, further contributing to these symptoms. 7 Cognitive decline and loss of independence often lead to sadness and hopelessness, 8 exacerbated by isolation and stigma. 7 , 9 , 10 Approximately 50% of AD patients experience depression, 11 , 12 , 13 which has been linked to future cognitive decline and disease progression. 14 Evidence suggests AD hallmarks—Aβ plaques and tau tangles—may be linked to depression and anxiety symptoms, increasing AD risk. 6 Wu et al. 15 found participants with a history of major depressive disorder (MDD) had higher Aβ burden in the precuneus ( p = 0.045) and parietal region ( p = 0.038) than those without depression. 15 A further study found significantly higher combined tau and Aβ levels in MDD patients ( p = 0.01) and specifically in the posterior cingulate ( p = 0.04) and lateral temporal regions ( p = 0.01). 16 Lavretsky et al. 17 assessed 43 dementia‐free participants (23 had mild cognitive impairment [MCI]), examining depression, anxiety symptoms, and brain Aβ/tau quantification. In the MCI group, depressive symptoms were associated with tau and Aβ binding in the lateral temporal region, while anxiety symptoms correlated with the posterior cingulate. In non‐MCI participants, depression and anxiety symptoms were linked to tau/Aβ binding in the medial temporal and frontal regions. 17 These findings suggest even mild symptoms are linked to Aβ/tau deposition, with variations depending on the level of cognitive impairment. Conversely, Madsen et al. 18 found no association between depressive episodes and Aβ burden; however, their analysis focused on individuals recovered from depression at the time of Aβ imaging. Research has increasingly shown that lifestyle factors, including diet, have a significant impact on brain function and mental well‐being. 19 The Mediterranean diet (MeDi) and the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet are linked to reducing the risk and progression of depression and AD. 20 , 21 , 22 Rich in fruits, vegetables, fish, and nuts, they provide antioxidants, omega‐3 fatty acids, and anti‐inflammatory foods that combat oxidative stress and inflammation, key factors in depression and AD. 23 , 24 , 25 In contrast, a Western diet, high in refined grains and processed foods, is associated with higher depression rates 26 , 27 and an increased AD risk, 28 highlighting the role of nutrition in mental and cognitive health. The role of diet in the relationships among symptoms of depression, anxiety, and AD pathology remains unclear. While certain dietary patterns may influence mental health, the underlying mechanisms need further exploration. Researchers are investigating how specific nutrients and food groups might interact with brain health and mood disorders, with genetics and lifestyle factors adding complexity. A comprehensive understanding of dietary effects on disease progression is crucial for developing effective preventive interventions. To address this gap, we examined the moderating effects of dietary patterns on the relationship between symptoms of depression and anxiety, and brain Aβ load. We hypothesized that greater adherence to healthier diets and lower adherence to unhealthy diets would mitigate the negative effects of depression and anxiety on brain Aβ load. We also explored whether apolipoprotein E ( APOE ) ɛ4 allele carriers exhibit different moderating effects of diets on these relationships. 2. METHODS 2.1. Participants This study was conducted on cross‐sectional data from 524 cognitively unimpaired participants from the Australian Imaging, Biomarker &amp; Lifestyle (AIBL) study of aging 29 , 30 who completed the Cancer Council Victoria Food Frequency Questionnaire (CCVFFQ) and had a positron emission tomography (PET) scan at their baseline assessment. All AIBL participants were aged ≥ 60; exclusion criteria included a history of bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, non‐AD dementia, recent cancer (except basal cell skin carcinoma), Parkinson's disease, insulin‐dependent diabetes, symptomatic stroke, uncontrolled diabetes, and excessive alcohol consumption (more than two standard drinks per day for women or four for men). AIBL exclusion criteria also include those exhibiting significant current depression (Geriatric Depression Scale [GDS] score &gt; 5). Further details regarding recruitment, assessment, inclusion, and exclusion criteria have been described in detail elsewhere. 29 , 30 The AIBL Study received ethical approval from the institutional ethics committees of Austin Health, St. Vincent's Health, Hollywood Private Hospital (now Ramsay Health Care), and Edith Cowan University. 29 Written informed consent was obtained from each participant before undergoing any study‐related procedures. 2.2. Dietary assessment The CCVFFQ provides a comprehensive and efficient means of assessing the dietary habits of study participants. 31 This questionnaire includes 74 dietary items, allowing detailed information on food and nutrient intake over the past 12 months to be obtained. The CCVFFQ captures data on the daily consumption of various food items in grams per day. The food composition data used to calculate daily nutrient intake originates from the Nutrient Data Table for Use in Australia 1995 (NUTTAB95). This database provides detailed nutritional information on a wide range of foods consumed in Australia and was published by the Australian government's Department of Health in 1995. 32 2.3. MeDi score The MeDi score is determined using a standardized method. 33 Individuals are assigned a score of 1 for each beneficial component (fruits, vegetables, fish, cereals, and legumes) if their calorie‐adjusted consumption meets or exceeds cohort sex‐specific medians. Conversely, a score of 1 is allocated for detrimental components (meat and dairy products) if their calorie‐adjusted consumption falls below cohort sex‐specific medians. Furthermore, a score of 1 is assigned for a monounsaturated fat to saturated fat ratio at or above the median. Those individuals with moderate alcohol consumption (females: &gt; 5– &lt; 25 g/day, males: &gt; 10–&lt; 50 g/day) also receive a score of 1 for this component. The overall MeDi score is calculated as the sum of these individual scores, ranging from 0 to 9. 33 2.4. DASH diet score The DASH diet emphasizes reduced consumption of total fat, saturated fat, red meat, sugar, and cholesterol, while advocating for improved intake of vegetables, nuts, fruits, fish, whole grains, low‐fat dairy products, and poultry. The DASH diet score is created “a priori ” with participants categorized into quintiles based on their intake of nine components: vegetables, fruits, nuts and legumes, whole grains, low‐fat dairy products, sodium, red and processed meats, sweetened beverages, and monounsaturated/polyunsaturated fat intake. 34 As sweetened beverage intake was not a component assessed by the food frequency questionnaire, this was substituted for sugar intake in our DASH diet construction. Food intake (measured in grams) was adjusted for total energy. For beneficial components, individuals receive 5 points for being in the highest intake quintile, with scores decreasing incrementally to 1 point for the lowest intake quintile (quintile 1). Conversely, for detrimental components such as sugar, sodium, and red and processed meats, 5 points are allocated for quintile 1 (lowest intake), decreasing to 1 point for quintile 5 (highest intake). Subsequently, these component scores are aggregated to provide an overall score ranging from 9 to 45, 34 with higher scores indicating a healthier diet. RESEARCH‐IN‐CONTEXT Systematic review : Literature was reviewed using traditional (e.g., PubMed) sources and meeting abstracts and presentations, identifying studies on dietary patterns, particularly the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet, and their potential role in reducing the accumulation of hallmark amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques. The role of diet in the relationships among symptoms of depression, anxiety, and AD pathology remains unclear. Interpretation : The DASH diet moderated the relationship between depressive and anxiety symptoms and brain Aβ load. Higher symptoms were associated with greater Aβ load in individuals with lower DASH adherence. This effect was also observed for anxiety symptoms in apolipoprotein E ε4 carriers. The Mediterranean and Western diets did not moderate these relationships. Future directions : Longitudinal and intervention studies are required to establish causality and assess personalized dietary strategies based on genetic risk profiles. Future research should explore whether dietary modifications can mitigate Aβ burden and enhance cognitive resilience in aging populations. 2.5. Western diet score The a posterior Western dietary pattern involved categorizing 101 food and beverage items from the CCVFFQ into 33 predefined food groups to reduce individual food intake variations. Factor analysis (principal components) was applied using the absolute weight in grams per day for each food group. The resulting factors were rotated for clarity, using the varimax procedure to make them uncorrelated. The number of factors to retain was determined based on eigenvalues (&gt; 1.25), scree tests, and interpretability. A cut‐off of 0.30 was used to determine factor loadings included in the pattern. The Western diet pattern extracted from this analysis and its associated factor loadings is presented in Table 1 . Foods with higher factor loadings contribute more to the pattern, characterized by high loadings for red and processed meats, poultry, potatoes, refined grains, sweets and snacks, condiments, pizza, and nuts. For each participant, the Western diet score was calculated by summing the observed intakes of the food items included in the pattern, with each item weighted according to its specific factor loading. This resulted in a composite score representing overall adherence to the Western dietary pattern, for which higher scores reflected greater adherence. This method of scoring has been used in previous research. 21 2.6. Anxiety and depression symptoms assessment The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) was used to assess anxiety and depression symptoms among participants. This widely used self‐report questionnaire measures symptoms of anxiety and depression in various clinical and research contexts. Comprising 14 items—7 for anxiety and 7 for depression—it offers valuable insights into an individual's emotional well‐being. Each item is scored from 0 to 3, with 3 representing the highest level of anxiety or depression. An overall subscale score &gt; 8 indicates significant symptoms of depression or anxiety. 35 2.7. Neuroimaging biomarker analysis—Aβ PET Brain Aβ load is measured in AIBL participants with PET using one of the following Aβ tracers: 11 C‐Pittsburgh compound B, 18 F‐NAV4694, 18 F‐Florbetaben, 18 F‐Flutemetamol, or 18 F‐Florbetapir. Methodology for each tracer has been described previously. 36 Briefly, PET images are analyzed using CapAIBL, and brain Aβ burden is expressed in the Centiloid (CL) scale, to normalize values from different radiotracers, the methodology of which has been shown to be valid and reliable. 36 The CL scale provides a single continuous scale across the different Aβ imaging tracers, with a value of 0 representing the typical brain Aβ load in young controls, and 100 the typical brain Aβ load seen in mild AD patients. 37 2.8. APOE genotyping DNA was extracted from whole blood samples using QIAamp DNA blood spin column kits (Qiagen) as previously described. 29 , 30 Participants’ APOE genotypes were determined using Taq Man genotyping assays (Life Technologies) using the Quant‐StudioTM 12k Flex Real‐Time‐PCR system (Applied Biosystems), as previously described. 38 , 39 APOE carrier status, as included in data analysis, was defined as the presence (one or two copies) or absence (zero copies) of the ε4 allele. 2.9. Statistical analysis Statistical analyses were carried out using R version 4.3.0, with a significance threshold p &lt; 0.05. Body mass index (BMI) was the only variable with missing data. We used multivariate imputation by chained equations to estimate BMIs for 44 participants. The imputed BMI data closely reflected the initial distribution, justifying its inclusion in subsequent analysis. The optimal model configuration, determined by the Akaike information criterion (AIC) during the model selection process, identified the best‐fitting model, which included the interaction between brain Aβ and diet scores, alongside covariates sex, age, country of birth (Australia vs. other), and APOE ε4 allele carriage status. Among the 159 APOE ε4 carriers, 16 were homozygous (ε4/ε4), while the remaining 143 were heterozygous (ε3/ε4 or ε2/ε4). Given the small number of ε4 homozygotes, analyses were conducted using a binary ε4 carrier status. BMI, years of education (≤ 12 years vs. &gt; 12 years; as a proxy for socioeconomic status), energy intake, past smoking status, depression medication, and a cardiovascular disease (CVD) score (ranging from 0–4, participants were given a point for current or previous history of hypertension, stroke, heart attack, and angina) were included in the model selection process but found to not be included in the best‐fitting model. Means, standard deviations, and percentages are provided for the entire cohort demographics and when stratified by APOE genotype. Group relationships were examined through independent samples t tests for continuous variables and chi‐squared (χ2) tests for categorical variables. The primary objective of the analysis was to investigate whether dietary patterns moderate the relationships between symptoms of depression or anxiety and brain Aβ. The moderation analyses were conducted separately for each dietary pattern (MeDi, DASH, and Western diet), with each depression and anxiety symptom assessment, as well as brain Aβ load. The false discovery rate (FDR) correction method was implemented to address the issue of multiple comparisons. Furthermore, the moderating effect was explored using a simple slopes analysis, enabling the visualization of the data at the mean and one standard deviation (SD) above and below the mean of the moderator variable, the diet score. 3. RESULTS 3.1. Demographic statistics The cohort comprised 524 cognitively unimpaired participants (44% male) with an average age of 71.74 ± 6.03 years. Nearly 30% were APOE ε4 allele carriers (the most common genetic risk factor for AD). Non‐carriers of the APOE ε4 allele were significantly older than APOE ε4 allele carriers. The APOE ε4 allele carriers had significantly higher brain Aβ load than non‐carriers, and a higher percentage were born in Australia (Table 2 ). There were no statistically significant differences between APOE ε4 allele carriers and non‐carriers regarding symptoms of depression and anxiety, or dietary pattern scores. 3.2. Moderation analysis After adjustment for FDR, a significant interaction between symptoms of depression and the DASH diet score on brain Aβ load was observed (Figure 1 , Table 3 ). Simple slopes analysis revealed that this interaction was significant in participants adhering to the DASH diet score at 1 SD below the mean level with a positive relationship (β = 3.321, standard error [SE] = 0.943, p &lt; 0.001), meaning that higher depressive symptoms were associated with higher brain Aβ load (as shown by a higher CL scale) among participants consuming the DASH diet below the mean level. At the mean level and 1 SD above the mean level of the DASH diet, the relationship between depression and brain Aβ load was not significant (β = 1.293, SE = 0.681, p = 0.058; β = –0.734, SE = 0.960, p = 0.445, respectively). Similarly, there was a significant interaction between anxiety symptoms and the DASH diet score on brain Aβ load (Table 3 ). Simple slopes analysis revealed that this interaction was significant again, in participants who adhered to the DASH diet at 1 SD below the mean level with a positive relationship (β = 2.026, SE = 0.679, p = 0.003), meaning that higher anxiety symptoms were associated with higher brain Aβ load (as shown by a higher CL scale) among participants consuming the DASH diet below the mean level. At the mean level and 1 SD above the mean level of the DASH diet, the relationship between depression and brain Aβ load was not significant (β = –0.567, SE = 0.490, p = 0.247; β = –0.892, SE = 0.665, p = 0.180, respectively). However, upon stratification by APOE ε4 carrier status, this observation was significant only among individuals carrying the APOE ε4 allele (Figure 2 ; Table 3 ). No associations were observed for the cohort as a whole, or when stratified by APOE ɛ4 carrier status for interactions between MeDi and Western diet, and symptoms of depression or anxiety on brain Aβ load. Additionally, when stratified by APOE ε4 carrier status, there was no significant association between the DASH diet and symptoms of depression on brain Aβ load (Table 3 ). 4. DISCUSSION This study investigated the moderating effect of dietary patterns on the relationship between symptoms of depression and anxiety, and brain Aβ load in a cohort of cognitively unimpaired older adults. The DASH diet was observed to moderate the relationship between symptoms of depression and brain Aβ load, such that in those with lower DASH diet consumption, greater depressive symptoms were associated with higher Aβ load. Additionally, the DASH diet was observed to moderate the relationship between anxiety symptoms and brain Aβ load, such that in those with lower DASH diet consumption, greater anxiety symptoms were associated with higher Aβ load. This association was observed in the cohort as a whole and in APOE ε4 allele carriers when stratified by APOE ε4 carrier status. Interestingly, the MeDi and Western diet scores did not moderate the relationships between symptoms of depression and anxiety and brain Aβ load in the cohort as a whole or when stratified by APOE ε4 carrier status. Given that anxiety has been shown to interact with Aβ burden to accelerate cognitive decline, dietary interventions such as increasing DASH diet adherence may serve as a modifiable factor to mitigate this effect. 3 , 10 , 13 These findings further support the evidence that dietary patterns, particularly the DASH diet, may moderate the association between symptoms of mental health (depression and anxiety) and AD brain biomarkers. Several studies have provided evidence supporting the notion that lower adherence to the DASH diet is associated with increased depression and poorer mental health outcomes. 40 , 41 In previous studies, even individuals with low adherence to the DASH diet demonstrated a significant inverse association between DASH diet adherence and depressive symptoms and mental health outcomes. 40 , 42 This finding suggests that incorporating elements of the DASH diet into one's eating habits, rather than strict adherence, may still offer mental health benefits. Moreover, research has indicated that individuals dealing with mental illnesses often face challenges in maintaining a healthy diet, potentially leading to lower adherence to healthy diets like the DASH diet. 43 This lowered adherence may exacerbate the negative impact of mental illnesses on cognitive health, potentially contributing to increased Aβ deposition. 44 , 45 Conversely, research indicated that the DASH diet had a beneficial influence on Aβ levels, potentially reducing the accumulation of Aβ related to AD. 46 The significant interaction observed whereby adherence to the DASH diet at lower than the mean level was moderating the relationship between anxiety symptoms and Aβ burden specifically among APOE ɛ4 allele carriers, suggests that those at higher risk of AD due to carriage of the APOE ɛ4 allele, were also at greater risk for diet‐related Aβ deposition if they also had anxiety symptoms. Lower adherence to the DASH diet may exacerbate the negative effects of anxiety symptoms on cognitive health. This aligns with the findings of Smith et al., 43 which suggest that anxiety, through mechanisms such as unhealthy dietary choices and stress‐related neurobiological pathways, could potentially accelerate Aβ deposition and hasten the progression of AD in APOE ɛ4 allele carriers. Importantly, we observed that neither the MeDi nor Western diet scores showed significant interactions with symptoms of depression, anxiety, or brain Aβ load. These results indicate that the DASH diet may exert a unique influence compared to other dietary patterns assessed in this study. One possible explanation for the lack of significant interactions with the MeDi diet score could be the diverse nature of this dietary pattern. Although the MeDi diet emphasizes heart‐healthy fats like olive oil, nuts, and fish, individuals following the diet may have varying nutritional compositions and dietary choices. 47 This variability may have weakened the potential associations between the MeDi diet and symptoms of depression and anxiety, and brain Aβ load in our cohort. Similarly, the Western diet score, which reflects a dietary pattern characterized by high levels of processed foods, saturated fats, and sugar, did not exhibit significant moderating effects. This may be due to the broad spectrum of Western dietary habits, as individuals within this group might still have divergent nutrient intakes and dietary preferences that impact the relationship between diet and cognitive outcomes. 48 , 49 Contrary to this, the DASH diet specifically focuses on reducing sodium intake while promoting the consumption of nutrient‐rich foods like fruits, vegetables, whole grains, lean proteins, and low‐fat dairy products. 50 , 51 These components are known to have profound effects on blood pressure regulation and overall vascular health. It is possible that the precise and targeted nature of the DASH diet's recommendations, particularly its emphasis on specific nutrients such as potassium, calcium, and magnesium, could explain its unique impact on symptoms of depression and anxiety, and brain Aβ load observed. 52 , 53 A central feature of the DASH diet is its emphasis on reducing sodium intake. Excessive sodium consumption has been associated with endothelial dysfunction, increased blood pressure, and blood–brain barrier (BBB) disruption, which can all impair cerebral perfusion and promote Aβ accumulation in the brain. 54 , 55 Studies have shown that high sodium intake can exacerbate neurovascular dysfunction and may lead to impaired Aβ clearance across the BBB, thereby accelerating Aβ pathology. 56 In contrast, adherence to the DASH diet, characterized by low sodium intake, may improve vascular health 57 and facilitate more efficient clearance of Aβ from the brain. 53 Furthermore, the DASH diet is rich in magnesium, a mineral that plays a crucial role in neuroprotection by regulating N‐methyl‐D‐aspartate (NMDA) receptor activity, an important mechanism given that excessive NMDA receptor activation can lead to excitotoxicity and neuronal damage, which are implicated in the pathogenesis of AD, while also modulating oxidative stress, and enhancing synaptic plasticity. 58 , 59 Magnesium has also been shown to inhibit Aβ aggregation and reduce neuroinflammation, two key pathological features of AD. 60 Additionally, potassium and calcium, also abundant in the DASH diet, contribute to improved vascular function 61 and reduced oxidative stress. 62 These findings highlight the necessity for personalized dietary interventions, taking into account individual preferences and genetic factors, to enhance the precision and effectiveness of dietary strategies for cognitive health. 63 The other main difference is alcohol; current research on the relationship between alcohol consumption and the risk of AD has not yet yielded a definitive conclusion. Studies suggest a potential link between high alcohol consumption and an increased risk of AD, 64 , 65 , 66 with others observing a protective effect associated with moderate alcohol intake. 67 , 68 Although MeDi involves only low–moderate alcohol intake, this potentially could have a negative impact on our cohort. The study has limitations to acknowledge. The CCVFFQ relies on participants’ estimations of food intake over the previous year; this can lead to misclassification of dietary pattern adherence due to limited accuracy and is a common limitation in studies with diet. To address this limitation, we assessed participants classified as cognitively unimpaired only. As part of the study exclusion criteria, those exhibiting significant current depression at the time of the baseline assessment (GDS score &gt; 5) were excluded. Therefore, the cohort used in the current analysis had only a possibility of mild depression, and additional associations may have been observed in a cohort, including those with moderate and severe depression levels. The exclusion criteria for specific conditions and the focus on cognitively unimpaired individuals may limit the generalizability of findings to broader populations, including those with cognitive impairment. Additionally, although APOE ε4 carrier status was accounted for, an insufficient number were ε4 homozygotes ( n = 16), limiting our ability to explore dose‐dependent APOE effects. Finally, the study's cross‐sectional design limits the inference of temporal and cause‐and‐effect relationships, and this will need to be assessed using longitudinal and intervention data. To strengthen causal inferences and clarify the directionality of observed associations, future research will use the longitudinal design of the AIBL study to examine whether adherence to specific dietary patterns and the presence of depressive or anxiety symptoms predict changes in cerebral Aβ burden over time. These analyses will provide critical insights into the temporal dynamics underlying the relationship between modifiable lifestyle factors, mental health, and AD pathology. Many aspects of our study provide confidence in our findings. We have used a well‐characterized cohort with the vast majority being White, increasing the internal validity of our results. We have taken a very conservative approach by controlling for a wide range of demographic variables and using FDR adjustment to determine statistical significance. We also tested the inclusion of physical activity level as a potential confounder and found that it did not alter the results. The dietary data were collected using an instrument previously validated in earlier epidemiological studies to comprehensively evaluate long‐term dietary intake. 69 Our study provides valuable insights into the complex relationships among dietary patterns, mental health symptoms (depression and anxiety), and an AD‐related brain biomarker as assessed through PET imaging. The findings highlight the moderating role of the DASH diet in this complex relationship in older adults. Low adherence to the DASH diet appears to exacerbate the negative impact of mental health symptoms on brain health, underscoring the importance of considering dietary interventions in the context of mental health and neurodegenerative disease prevention and management. Additionally, the interaction observed only in APOE ε4 allele carriers between anxiety symptoms and brain Aβ burden in those with a lower DASH diet score highlights the role of genetics in this relationship. Importantly, the unique effects of the DASH diet compared to other dietary patterns suggest the need for more tailored dietary interventions in future research. Overall, this study contributes to our understanding of the intricate interplay among diet, mental health symptoms, and neurodegenerative processes. CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors declare no conflicts of interest related to this work. The Australian Imaging, Biomarkers, and Lifestyle (AIBL) study has received partial financial support from various funding sources, including government and non‐government organizations, as outlined in the funding section. Some authors are affiliated with institutions that have received research funding from industry partners; however, none of these relationships influenced the study design, data collection, analysis, interpretation, or manuscript preparation. All authors have reviewed and approved the final manuscript and declare no competing interests. Author disclosures are available in the supporting information . CONSENT STATEMENT This study was conducted in accordance with the ethical standards of the participating institutions and the Declaration of Helsinki. Ethical approval was obtained from the institutional ethics committees of Austin Health, St. Vincent's Health, Hollywood Private Hospital (now Ramsay Health Care), and Edith Cowan University. All participants provided written informed consent before undergoing any study‐related procedures. Supporting information Supporting Information ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors acknowledge the participants of the AIBL Study and their families and thank them for their ongoing support of research into Alzheimer's disease. The AIBL Study ( www.AIBL.csiro.au ) is a consortium between Austin Health, CSIRO, Edith Cowan University, the Florey Institute (The University of Melbourne), and the National Ageing Research Institute. The study has received partial financial support from the Alzheimer's Association (US), the Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation, an Anonymous foundation, the Science and Industry Endowment Fund, the Dementia Collaborative Research Centres, the Victorian Government's Operational Infrastructure Support program, the Australian Alzheimer's Research Foundation, the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), and The Yulgilbar Foundation. Numerous commercial interactions have supported data collection and analyses. In‐kind support has also been provided by Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Cogstate Ltd, Hollywood Private Hospital, The University of Melbourne, and St Vincent's Hospital. SRRS is supported by an NHMRC Investigator Grant (GNT1197315). Open access publishing facilitated by Edith Cowan University, as part of the Wiley ‐ Edith Cowan University agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians. Al Shamsi HSS, Gardener SL, Rainey‐Smith SR, et al. The role of diet in moderating the relationship between symptoms of depression and brain amyloid load. Alzheimer's Dement. 2025;21:e70560. 10.1002/alz.70560 DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The data underlying this article were accessed from the Australian Imaging, Biomarkers, and Lifestyle (AIBL) study and are not publicly available due to ethical and privacy restrictions. Access to AIBL data can be requested through the AIBL study website ( https://aibl.csiro.au ) following their data access procedures. Additional information can be obtained by contacting the corresponding author. REFERENCES 1. Gallagher D, Kiss A, Lanctot K, Herrmann N. Depression and risk of Alzheimer dementia: a longitudinal analysis to determine predictors of increased risk among older adults with depression. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2018;26(8):819‐827. 2. Ma L, Tan ECK, Bush AI, et al., Elucidating the link between anxiety/depression and Alzheimer's dementia in the Australian imaging biomarkers and lifestyle (AIBL) study. J Epidemiol Glob Health. 2024; 14(3):1130‐1141. 3. Lim YY, Pietrzak RH, Ellis KA, et al., Rapid decline in episodic memory in healthy older adults with high amyloid‐β. J. Alzheimer's Disease. 2013;33(3):675‐679. 4. Zubenko GS, Zubenko WN, McPherson S, et al., A collaborative study of the emergence and clinical features of the major depressive syndrome of Alzheimer's disease. Am J Psychiatry. 2003;160(5):857‐866. 5. Migliorelli R, Tesón A, Sabe L, et al., Prevalence and correlates of dysthymia and major depression among patients with Alzheimer's disease. Am J Psychiatry. 1995;152:37‐44. 6. Harrington K, Lim YY, Gould E, et al. Amyloid‐beta and depression in healthy older adults: a systematic review. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2015;49(1):36‐46. 7. Botto R, Callai N, Cermelli A, Causarano L, Rainero I. Anxiety and depression in Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review of pathogenetic mechanisms and relation to cognitive decline. Neurolog Sci. 2022;43(7):4107‐4124. 8. Panegyres PK, Chen HY. Early‐onset Alzheimer's disease: a global cross‐sectional analysis. Eur J Neurol. 2014;21(9):1149‐e65. 9. Nobis L, Husain M. Apathy in Alzheimer's disease. Curr Opin Behav Sci. 2018;22:7‐13. 10. Harrington KD, Gould E, Lim YY, et al. Amyloid burden and incident depressive symptoms in cognitively normal older adults. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2017;32(4):455‐463. 11. Culpepper L, Lam R, McIntyre R. Cognitive impairment in patients with depression: awareness, assessment, and management. J Clin Psychiatry. 2017;78(9):3185. 12. Lam RW, Kennedy SH, McIntyre RS, Khullar A. Cognitive dysfunction in major depressive disorder: effects on psychosocial functioning and implications for treatment. Can J Psychiatry. 2014;59(12):649‐654. 13. Pietrzak RH, Lim YY, Neumeister A, et al. Amyloid‐β, anxiety, and cognitive decline in preclinical Alzheimer disease: a multicenter, prospective cohort study. JAMA psychiatry. 2015;72(3):284‐291. 14. Ma L. Depression, anxiety, and apathy in mild cognitive impairment: current perspectives. Front Aging Neurosci. 2020;12:9. 15. Wu K, Hsiao I, Chen C, et al. Increased brain amyloid deposition in patients with a lifetime history of major depression: evidenced on 18 F‐florbetapir (AV‐45/Amyvid) positron emission tomography. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2014;41:714‐722. 16. Kumar A. Protein binding in patients with late‐life depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68(11):1143‐1150. 17. Lavretsky H, Siddarth P, Kepe V, et al. Depression and anxiety symptoms are associated with cerebral FDDNP‐PET binding in middle‐aged and older nondemented adults. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2009;17(6):493‐502. 18. Madsen K, Hasselbalch BJ, Frederiksen KS, et al. Lack of association between prior depressive episodes and cerebral [11C] PiB binding. Neurobiol Aging. 2012;33(10):2334‐2342. 19. Gardener S, Rainey‐Smith S. The role of nutrition in cognitive function and brain ageing in the elderly. Current Nutrition Reports. 2018;7:139‐149. 20. Ballarini T, Melo van Lent D, Brunner J, et al. Alzheimer disease biomarkers, and brain atrophy in old age. Neurology. 2021;96(24):e2920‐e2932. 21. Gardener SL, Rainey‐Smith SR, Barnes MB, et al. Dietary patterns and cognitive decline in an Australian study of ageing. Mol Psychiatry. 2015;20(7):860‐866. 22. Ford PA, Jaceldo‐Siegl K, Lee JW, Youngberg W, Tonstad S. Intake of Mediterranean foods associated with positive affect and low negative affect. J Psychosom Res. 2013;74(2):142‐148. 23. Tangney CC, Kwasny MJ, Li H, Wilson RS, Evans DA, Morris MC. Adherence to a Mediterranean‐type dietary pattern and cognitive decline in a community population. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;93(3):601‐607. 24. Rainey‐Smith S, Gu Y, Gardener SL, et al. Mediterranean diet adherence and rate of cerebral Aβ‐amyloid accumulation: data from the Australian Imaging. Biomarkers and Lifestyle Study of Ageing. Transl Psychiatry. 2018;8(1):238. 25. Xu Lou I, Ali K, Chen Q. Effect of nutrition in Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review. Front Neurosci. 2023;17:1147177. 26. Moludi J, Moradinazar M, Hamzeh B, Najafi F, Pasdar Y. Depression relationship with dietary patterns and dietary inflammatory index in women: result from Ravansar cohort study. Neuropsych Dis Treat. 2020;16:1595‐1603. 27. Ruusunen A, Lehto SM, Mursu J, et al. Dietary patterns are associated with the prevalence of elevated depressive symptoms and the risk of getting a hospital discharge diagnosis of depression in middle‐aged or older Finnish men. J Affect Disord. 2014;159:1‐6. 28. Samadi M, Moradi S, Moradinazar M, Mostafai R, Pasdar Y. Dietary pattern in relation to the risk of Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review. Neurolog Sci. 2019;40:2031‐2043. 29. Ellis KA, Bush AI, Darby D, et al. The Australian Imaging, Biomarkers and Lifestyle (AIBL) study of aging: methodology and baseline characteristics of 1112 individuals recruited for a longitudinal study of Alzheimer's disease. Int Psychogeriatr. 2009;21(4):672‐687. 30. Fowler C, Rainey‐Smith SR, Bird S, et al. Fifteen years of the Australian Imaging, Biomarkers and Lifestyle (AIBL) study: progress and observations from 2,359 older adults spanning the spectrum from cognitive normality to Alzheimer's disease. J.Alzheimer's disease Rep. 2021;5(1):443‐468. 31. Gardener SL, Rainey‐Smith SR, Macaulay SL, et al. Comparative analysis of the cancer council of victoria and the online commonwealth scientific and industrial research organisation ffq. Br J Nutr. 2015;114(10):1683‐1693. 32. Lewis J, Milligan G, Hunt A. Nuttab95: Nutrient data table for use in Australia. Food Standards Australia New Zealand; 1995. 33. Trichopoulou A, Costacou T, Bamia C, Trichopoulos D. Adherence to a Mediterranean diet and survival in a Greek population. N Engl J Med. 2003;348(26):2599‐2608. 34. Chen X, Liu Z, Sachdev PS, Kochan NA, O'Leary F, Brodaty H. Dietary patterns and cognitive health in older adults: findings from the Sydney Memory and Ageing Study. J Nutr Health Aging. 2021;25:255‐262. 35. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JBW, Löwe B. A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety disorder: the GAD‐7. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(10):1092‐1097. 36. Bourgeat P, Doré V, Fripp J, et al. Implementing the centiloid transformation for (11)C‐PiB and beta‐amyloid (18)F‐PET tracers using CapAIBL. Neuroimage. 2018;183:387‐393. 37. Klunk WE, Koeppe RA, Price JC, et al. The Centiloid Project: standardizing quantitative amyloid plaque estimation by PET. Alzheimers Dement. 2015;11(1):1‐15.e1‐4. 38. Porter T, Burnham SC, Milicic L, et al. Utility of an Alzheimer's disease risk‐weighted polygenic risk score for predicting rates of cognitive decline in preclinical Alzheimer's disease: a prospective longitudinal study. J Alzheimer's Disease. 2018;66(3):1193‐1211. 39. Porter T, Burnham SC, Savage G, et al. A polygenic risk score derived from episodic memory weighted genetic variants is associated with cognitive decline in preclinical Alzheimer's disease. Front Aging Neurosci. 2018;10:423. 40. Shiraseb F, Mirzababaei A, Daneshzad E, et al. The association of dietary approaches to stop hypertension (DASH) and Mediterranean diet with mental health, sleep quality and chronotype in women with overweight and obesity: a cross‐sectional study. Eating and Weight Disorders‐Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity. 2023;28(1):57. 41. Tan J, Wang C, Tomiyama A. Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet and mental well‐being: a systematic review. Nutr Rev. 2023;82(1):nuad038. 42. Perez‐Cornago A, Sanchez‐Villegas A, Bes‐Rastrollo M, et al. Relationship between adherence to Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet indices and incidence of depression during up to 8 years of follow‐up. Pub Health Nutri. 2017;20(13):2383‐2392. 43. Smith KJ, Sanderson K, McNaughton SA, Gall SL, Dwyer T, Venn AJ. Longitudinal associations between fish consumption and depression in young adults. Am J Epidemiol. 2014;179(10):1228‐1235. 44. Donovan NJ, Locascio JJ, Marshall GA, et al. Longitudinal association of amyloid beta and anxious‐depressive symptoms in cognitively normal older adults. Am J Psychiatry. 2018;175(6):530‐537. 45. Daniel GD, Chen H, Bertoni AG, et al. DASH diet adherence and cognitive function: multi‐ethnic study of atherosclerosis. Clinical nutrition ESPEN. 2021;46:223‐231. 46. Morris M, Tangney CC, Wang Y, et al. MIND diet associated with reduced incidence of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia. 2015;11(9):1007‐1014. 47. Widmer RJ, Flammer AJ, Lerman LO, Lerman A. The Mediterranean diet, its components, and cardiovascular disease. Am J Med. 2015;128(3):229‐238. 48. Clemente‐Suárez VJ, Beltrán‐Velasco AI, Redondo‐Flórez L, Martín‐Rodríguez A, Tornero‐Aguilera JF. Global impacts of western diet and its effects on metabolism and health: a narrative review. Nutrients. 2023;15(12):2749. 49. Rakhra V, Galappaththy SL, Bulchandani S, Cabandugama PK. Obesity and the western diet: how we got here. Mo Med. 2020;117(6):536. 50. Challa H, Ameer M, Uppaluri K. DASH diet to stop hypertension. StatPearls [Internet]. StatPearls Publishing; 2022. 51. Theodoridis X, Chourdakis M, Chrysoula L, et al. Adherence to the DASH diet and risk of hypertension: a systematic review and meta‐analysis. Nutrients. 2023;15(14):3261. 52. Muscaritoli M. The impact of nutrients on mental health and well‐being: insights from the literature. Front Nutr. 2021;8:656290. 53. Bhuiyan NZ, Hasan MK, Mahmud Z, Hossain MS, Rahman A. Prevention of Alzheimer's disease through diet: an exploratory review. Metabolism Open. 2023;20:100257. 54. Faraco G, Hochrainer K, Segarra SG, et al. Dietary salt promotes cognitive impairment through tau phosphorylation. Nature. 2019;574(7780):686‐690. 55. Liu Y, Chen J, Li Z, et al. High‐salt diet enhances hippocampal oxidative stress and cognitive impairment in mice. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2014;114:10‐15. 56. Carare RO, Hawkes CA, Jeffrey M, Kalaria RN, Weller RO. cerebral amyloid angiopathy, prion angiopathy, CADASIL, and the spectrum of protein elimination failure angiopathies (PEFA) in neurodegenerative disease with a focus on therapy. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2013;39(6):593‐611. 57. Abbasi A, Shafie D, Heidari Moghaddam R, et al. Investigation of adherence to DASH diet components and reduction of heart failure risk in adults: a case‐control study. ARYA atherosclerosis. 2024;20(4):38. 58. Barbagallo M, Dominguez L. Magnesium and aging. Curr Pharm Des. 2010;16(7):832‐839. 59. Slutsky I, Abumaria N, Wu L, et al. Enhancement of learning and memory by elevating brain magnesium. Neuron. 2010;65(2):165‐177. 60. Li W, Yu J, Liu Y, et al. Elevation of brain magnesium prevents synaptic loss and reverses cognitive deficits in Alzheimer's disease mouse model. Molecular brain. 2014;7:1‐20. 61. Rossman MJ, LaRocca TJ, Martens CR, Seals DR. Healthy lifestyle‐based approaches for successful vascular aging. J Appl Physiol. 2018;125(12):1888‐1900. 62. Al‐Solaiman Y, Jesri A, Zhao Y, et al. Low‐Sodium DASH reduces oxidative stress and improves vascular function in salt‐sensitive humans. J Hum Hypertens. 2009;23(12):826‐835. 63. Ordovas JM, Ferguson LR, Tai ES, Mathers JC. Personalised nutrition and health. BMJ. 2018;361:bmjk2173. 64. Topiwala A, Allan CL, Valkanova V, et al. Moderate alcohol consumption as risk factor for adverse brain outcomes and cognitive decline: longitudinal cohort study. BMJ. 2017;357:j2353. 65. Braillon A. Alcohol consumption and cognitive decline: the elephant in the room?. The Lancet Public Health. 2018;3(5):e216. 66. Zhang R, Shen L, Miles T, et al., Association of low to moderate alcohol drinking with cognitive functions from middle to older age among US adults. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(6):e207922. 67. Daviet R, Aydogan G, Jagannathan K, et al. Associations between alcohol consumption and gray and white matter volumes in the UK Biobank. Nat Commun. 2022;13(1):1175. 68. Anstey K, Mack H, Cherbuin N. Alcohol consumption as a risk factor for dementia and cognitive decline: meta‐analysis of prospective studies. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2009;17(7):542‐555. 69. Club H. Development of the Melbourne FFQ: a food frequency questionnaire for use in an Australian prospective study involving an ethnically diverse cohort. Asia Pacific J Clin Nutr. 1994;3:19‐31. Associated Data Supplementary Materials Supporting Information Data Availability Statement The data underlying this article were accessed from the Australian Imaging, Biomarkers, and Lifestyle (AIBL) study and are not publicly available due to ethical and privacy restrictions. Access to AIBL data can be requested through the AIBL study website ( https://aibl.csiro.au ) following their data access procedures. Additional information can be obtained by contacting the corresponding author.