2358 jdi Journal of Diabetes Investigation J Diabetes Investig Wiley PMC12209523 12209523 12209523 40452148 10.1111/jdi.70075 Sleep habits in the pathogenesis and management of diabesity Rasmussen Cecilie Holm 1 O Chun Kwan 2 3 Chan Wai Sze 4 Magkos Faidon 1 ✉ Kong Alice PS 2 3 ✉ 1 Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 2 Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 3 Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 4 Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China * Correspondence , Alice PS Kong, Tel.: +852 3505 1558, Fax: +852 2637 3852, E‐mail address: alicekong@cuhk.edu.hk , Faidon Magkos, Tel.: +45 35335827, E‐mail address: fma@nexs.ku.dk ✉ Corresponding author. 1 6 2025 16 7 1202 1202–1216 2 7 2025 © 2025 The Author(s). Journal of Diabetes Investigation published by Asian Association for the Study of Diabetes (AASD) and John Wiley &amp; Sons Australia, Ltd. This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes. ABSTRACT In parallel with the rising global epidemic of obesity and diabetes, termed “diabesity” to underscore the strong relationship between these two conditions, there has been a decreasing trend in the average sleep duration in many parts of the world. Sleep is an essential component of everyday life and plays a pivotal role in regulating energy metabolism and many other physiological functions. Updated guidelines include adequate sleep as one of the key elements of lifestyle therapy in diabetes management. From epidemiological studies, there are many researchers across the globe demonstrating a U‐shaped relationship between sleep duration and glycemia, as well as more adverse clinical outcomes (notably cardiovascular events and mortality) with shorter sleep in people with diabetes. Sleep deprivation results in inflammation, neurohormonal dysregulation impacting on appetite control, hedonic pathways, and reward processing and eventually facilitates obesity and diabetes. While there is a wealth of evidence supporting the mechanistic links between short sleep duration, weight gain, and dysglycemia, the reasons why long sleepers have worse metabolic health remain obscure. Not only sleep duration matters, but circadian alignment and quality of sleep are also crucial in optimizing metabolic health. Recognizing the importance of promoting sleep hygiene via non‐pharmacological strategies, such as sleep extension interventions and cognitive behavioral therapy, is attracting increasing clinical attention to prevent and manage people with diabesity. Keywords: Diabesity, Cognitive behavioral therapy, Sleep extension therapy Sleep insufficiency is associated with weight gain, dysglycemia and adverse clinical outcomes through neurohormonal dysregulation impacting on appetite control, hedonic pathways and reward processing, and inflammation while the reasons why long sleepers have worse metabolic health remain obscure. Not only sleep duration matters, but circadian alignment and quality of sleep are also crucial in optimizing metabolic health. Recognizing the importance of promoting sleep hygiene via non‐pharmacological strategies, such as sleep extension interventions and cognitive behavioural therapy, are attracting increasing clinical attention to prevent and manage people with diabesity. status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Revised 2025 Apr 28; Received 2025 Mar 25; Accepted 2025 May 7; Collection date 2025 Jul. INTRODUCTION A healthy lifestyle is the cornerstone for the management of people with obesity and diabetes. There are mounting evidence suggesting that, in addition to diet and exercise, sleep plays a pivotal role in modulating glucose and energy metabolism, among many other physiological functions. Recent international guidelines include adequate sleep as one of the key elements of lifestyle therapy in diabetes management 1 . This review aims to summarize the current literature on the epidemiological links between sleep and diabesity (a term coined to underscore the close relationship between obesity and diabetes); the evidence from clinical studies regarding potential mechanistic links between short sleep duration and dysregulation of energy metabolism and glucose homeostasis; the effects of extending sleep; as well as currently available strategies for improving sleep habits based on cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDIES LINKING DIABESITY AND SLEEP Rapid changes in technology, human behavior, and lifestyle over the past few decades have resulted in a dramatic increase in the prevalence of obesity and diabetes worldwide. From the analysis of data including 68.5 million individuals from 195 countries between 1980 and 2015, the prevalence of obesity has doubled in 73 countries with the prevalence of obesity estimated to be 12% in adults and 5% in children in 2015 2 . In 2022, more than half of the adult population worldwide has overweight or obesity, 45% and 16% respectively, whereas more than a quarter of children and adolescents have excess weight 3 . As obesity is a well‐recognized key driver of diabetes, it is not surprising that the prevalence of diabetes is also rising, with half a billion of people living with diabetes worldwide. According to the International Diabetes Federation (IDF), in 2021, one out of ten people (537 million) aged 20–79 years were suffering from diabetes. By 2045, this number is projected to increase to 784 million 4 . An interesting parallel with this global rising trend of diabesity is a decreasing trend in the duration of sleep, with three out of ten adults sleeping 6 h (h) or less per day 5 , 6 , 7 . Inadequate sleep is widespread among younger individuals as well and is particularly worrisome 8 , 9 . According to a prospective follow‐up of 516 school children (mean age at baseline in 2007–2008 was 13 years, with a mean follow‐up of 6.2 years), the proportion with sleep duration &lt;6.5 h per day during weekdays rise from 7.3% to 10.7% 9 . More alarmingly, the proportion who went to bed after midnight rose from 16% to 61% 9 . Numerous observational studies (cross‐sectional, case–control and cohort) have found significant associations between short sleep and obesity in all age groups (children, adolescents, and adults) and both sexes (males and females), independent of geographical location, ethnicity, and socioeconomic background 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 . Regarding the association between sleep duration and glycemia, there have been consistent reports globally that a U‐shaped relationship exists between sleep duration and glycemia 15 , as well as a link between sleep duration and clinical outcomes in people with diabetes 16 . A large‐scale study including 116,632 adults aged 35–70 years from 21 countries in seven geographic regions (Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology study) observed a curvilinear association between sleep duration and mortality with both short (≤6 h/day) and long (&gt;8 h/day) sleep duration being associated with an increased risk of all‐cause mortality and major cardiovascular events (defined as fatal cardiovascular events and non‐fatal myocardial infarction, stroke, and heart failure) after a median follow‐up of 7.8 years 16 . These findings are in keeping with another study including 113,138 Chinese adults aged 40–79 years 17 , which found that short and long sleep durations were associated with an increased risk of mortality with long sleepers having a higher mortality risk of cardiovascular disease and diabetes than short sleepers. Insufficient sleep can activate the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis and sympathetic nervous system leading to glucose intolerance 18 , 19 . While extensive research has provided evidence to unravel the mechanisms mediating the link between short sleep duration and poor glycemic control, the mechanisms linking long sleep duration with poor glycemic control remain obscure. It has been postulated that abnormally extended sleep is an indicator of poorer health 6 , 16 and is associated with depression and low socioeconomic state 7 . Not only does sleep duration matter, but the regularity of sleep habits and sleep quality are also important in the regulation of glucose homeostasis 15 , 20 (Figure 1 ). Circadian disruptions due to shift work, traveling across time zones, and eating late at night result in an escalated risk of obesity, diabetes, and metabolic syndrome 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 . Insomnia, one of the most common sleep problems, also impacts negatively on glycemic control among people with type 2 diabetes 20 possibly partly mediated through hyperactivity of HPA and sympathetic overdrive 25 . MECHANISTIC LINKS BETWEEN INADEQUATE SLEEP AND DIABESITY Glucose regulation Insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion A number of experimental studies have consistently shown that acute sleep deprivation (3.5–5.5 h per night for 3–7 days) can induce insulin resistance in healthy individuals, evaluated by the intravenous glucose tolerance test and the hyperinsulinemic–euglycemic clamp technique 19 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 . Importantly, this reduction in insulin action is not compensated for by an increase in insulin secretion from the β‐cells. Therefore, sleep restriction decreases the disposition index (a metric of pancreatic β‐cell function calculated as the product of insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion) and worsens glucose tolerance 19 , 27 , 28 , 29 . For example, Buxton et al . 28 conducted an inpatient study in 20 healthy young participants who underwent 6 days of 5 h of sleep per night and found a decrease in insulin sensitivity by 20%, no change in insulin secretion, and a reduction in the disposition index by ~30%. These laboratory sleep studies demonstrate that short‐term sleep loss induces an uncompensated insulin‐resistant state which resembles late prediabetes. Contrary, however, to peripheral insulin resistance (assumed to mostly reflect insulin action in skeletal muscle), sleep restriction does not affect basal hepatic glucose production nor its suppression by insulin, that is, it does not impair hepatic insulin sensitivity 26 . Still, sleep restriction alters intrahepatic metabolism, inasmuch as it changes the contribution of glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis to total hepatic glucose production and increases plasma ketone body concentrations (likely reflecting increased hepatic fatty acid oxidation) 26 . The underlying mechanisms at the tissue level have also been explored. In adipocytes, 4 days of sleep restriction (4.5 h per night) resulted in an insulin‐resistant state. Nearly twice as much insulin was required to cause the same phosphorylation of Akt (protein kinase B), which mediates both the translocation of glucose transporters to the plasma membrane to facilitate glucose transport into the cells and the dephosphorylation and inactivation of hormone‐sensitive lipase to suppress lipolysis 30 . This is consistent with the observation that sleep restriction increases plasma‐free fatty acid concentrations, likely reflecting augmented adipose tissue lipolysis 26 . In another study, 2 days of sleep deprivation (~4 h per night) reduced whole‐body insulin sensitivity evaluated by the oral glucose tolerance test (Matsuda index) and only tended to reduce Akt phosphorylation in muscle tissue 31 . The inability to demonstrate a significant effect may be due to methodological differences or the shorter period of sleep restriction. Interestingly, sleep quality may also contribute to diabetes risk. Disrupting slow‐wave sleep using acoustic stimulation resulted in impaired glucose tolerance, independent of sleep duration 27 , 32 . These findings raise the possibility that changes in sleep quality could also impact glucoregulation, but it is not entirely clear what the combined effect of short sleep duration and suboptimal sleep quality would be. Inflammation Chronic low‐grade inflammation is another contributing mechanism behind the development of hyperglycemia and type 2 diabetes 33 . Several studies report that sleep restriction can induce systemic inflammation by upregulating the production of proinflammatory cytokines 34 , 35 , 36 . In particular, sleep restriction increases circulating levels of interleukin‐6 34 , 35 , 36 and tumor‐necrosis‐factor‐α 36 . In a cross‐sectional study with 48 postmenopausal women, short sleepers demonstrated exacerbated inflammatory responses, which were even more pronounced among those individuals with visceral adiposity 35 . Importantly, not only does insufficient sleep induce a proinflammatory state, but it also seems to impair the process necessary to resolve inflammation 37 . A trial comparing 3 days of sleep restriction (4 h per night) to habitual sleep found that levels of specialized pro‐resolving mediators (a class of signaling molecules that orchestrate the resolution of inflammation) decreased. Even after three nights of recovery sleep, this downregulation persisted, which could indicate a prolonged inflammatory state following sleep restriction that is not acutely rescued by compensatory sleep recovery 37 . Hormonal regulation of appetite Leptin Various studies have investigated the effects of acute sleep restriction on leptin levels but results have been inconsistent 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 . In one study with 15 women, limiting sleep to only 3 h per night resulted in elevated morning leptin levels, although ratings of hunger and cravings did not change 39 . Building onto this, another study using 24‐h measurements found that 4 h of sleep per night for 2 days decreased mean leptin levels by 18%, even when controlling for food intake and activity levels, suggesting reduced satiety 38 . Accordingly, when food intake was allowed to change, Markwald et al . observed an increase in caloric intake leading to modest weight gain and consequently, an increase of 22% in average 24‐h leptin levels 40 . These findings imply that controlling or not for food intake may be an important confounder when attempting to interpret the effects of sleep duration on leptin. In another study, Hanlon et al . examined the effects of sleep restriction (~4.5 vs 8.5 h per night for 4 days) while food intake was controlled 44 . These investigators found no differences in average 24‐leptin concentrations, but noted a reduction in amplitude (i.e., the difference from average levels to peak values). Still, many studies have not been able to demonstrate significant effects of sleep deprivation on circulating leptin 42 , 43 , 45 , 46 , 47 . These mixed findings suggest that the effects of acute sleep restriction on leptin levels may vary depending on sleep duration, experimental conditions, and perhaps the characteristics of the participants (e.g., proportions of men and women in each study, proportions of subjects with normal body weight or obesity, etc.). For instance, Simpson et al . found that elevated morning leptin concentrations after sleep restriction with ad libitum access to food were more pronounced in women and in participants with higher BMI compared to men and those with lower BMI, respectively 48 . In another study, one night of total sleep deprivation with standardized meals significantly reduced fasting leptin levels, with the effect again being more pronounced in women than in men 41 . Ghrelin Sleep restriction has consistently been shown to increase ghrelin levels, which may contribute to increased hunger and food cravings. In a cross‐over study with nine normal‐weight men, ghrelin increased by 22% after just a single night of total sleep deprivation. In contrast, in the same study, no changes were found after moderate sleep restriction (~4.5 h per night) compared to habitual sleep (7 h per night) 42 . However, another study with 12 healthy men reported that after two nights of sleep restriction, ghrelin levels during daytime (8:00 AM–9:00 PM) increased by 28%, and this was accompanied by a 24% increase in subjective ratings of hunger and cravings for carbohydrate‐rich foods 38 . It may thus be that cumulative sleep loss is important for the increase in ghrelin to manifest. It may also be that sleep restriction influences ghrelin secretion in a manner that depends on the timing of sleep loss. A study investigating the 24‐h ghrelin profile in 15 normal‐weight healthy men found that, compared to regular sleep (8 h during 22:15 PM–6:45 AM), ghrelin increased after a single day of “late‐night” sleep loss (4 h of sleep during 10:30 PM–3:00 AM) but not after a single day of “early‐night” sleep loss (4 h of sleep during 2:15 AM–6:45 AM), suggesting a chronobiological effect 49 . Similarly, in another study with 14 normal‐weight men, ghrelin levels were lower early at night (around 1:30 AM) during total sleep deprivation, whereas in the early morning hours (4:30 AM–7:30 AM), ghrelin levels were 11% higher, implying that sleep loss during early morning augments ghrelin secretion 46 . In addition, after sleep deprivation, participants felt hungrier in the morning and had lower energy expenditure (both resting energy expenditure and diet‐induced thermogenesis) 46 . These alterations would favor positive energy balance and weight gain if sustained. During 4 days of sleep restriction (4.5 h/night), the ghrelin peak occurred earlier (00:27 AM vs 01:39 AM), and the ghrelin‐to‐leptin ratio increased 44 , suggesting a shift in neuroendocrine signaling consistent with promoting more hunger and less satiety. Consequently, participants reported greater ratings of hunger, a stronger desire to eat, and an increased ability or desire to eat more 44 . Almost identical findings were reported in other studies after 2–4 days of sleep restriction 38 , 47 . Furthermore, Broussard et al . reported that not only average ghrelin levels were higher during sleep restriction, but the post‐meal dips (ghrelin typically declines after eating) were smaller and thus, ghrelin concentrations remained higher after all meals 47 . Participants overall consumed more calories, especially from snacks and sweets during sleep restriction, indicating a crucial role of ghrelin in hedonic eating 47 . Be that as it may, there are also reports of no differences in energy intake, feelings of hunger, or daytime ghrelin profile after 2 days of regular sleep (~7.8 h/night) compared to sleep restriction (4 h/night) 45 . Furthermore, the impact of sleep restriction on ghrelin appears to be influenced by body weight status and sex. One study found that short sleep increased morning pre‐meal (08:00 AM–12:00 PM) total ghrelin concentrations in men but not women 43 . Moreover, ghrelin increases appear to be more pronounced in individuals with obesity, suggesting greater vulnerability to the appetite‐stimulating effects of sleep restriction 41 . Taken together, acute or short‐term sleep loss is likely to increase ghrelin levels, which can enhance hunger and cravings and thus facilitate the establishment of positive energy balance. Hedonic pathway and reward processing Several studies with cross‐over design have used functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate the effect of acute sleep restriction on food‐related inhibitory control and reward processing across different populations 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 . For instance, in a study of adolescents, 5 days of sleep restriction (5 h/night) increased food reward regardless of weight status (normal weight, overweight, or obesity) 51 . Notably, adolescents who had overweight or obesity had consistently higher food reward scores irrespective of sleep condition 51 . In a similar cohort of adolescents, increased activation in reward‐related brain regions and the bilateral posterior cingulate cortex was observed after sleep restriction (5 nights of 5 h/night) 50 . Evidence also suggests that sleep restriction impairs inhibitory control and thereby weakens the ability to resist unhealthy food choices. This has been demonstrated in behavioral tasks assessing impulse control. For instance, results from an inhibitory control task (Go/No‐go task) showed that when sleep was restricted, adolescents were more accurate when they had to press a button for food images (“Go” trials, 94%) compared to when they had to stop themselves from pressing (“No‐Go” trials, 87%), indicating weaker self‐control 51 . Neuroimaging further supports this behavioral evidence and further demonstrates that adolescents with overweight or obesity may be even more susceptible to sleep deprivation‐induced overeating. Unlike their normal‐weight peers, who manifested increased activation in brain regions associated with inhibition (right anterior insula and right anterior cingulate cortex) when they were sleep‐deprived, no such increase in inhibition‐related neural activation was observed among those with overweight or obesity 50 . Sleep restriction reduces activity in the prefrontal cortex, which controls decision‐making while increasing activity in more primitive brain structures linked to motivation and desire. This imbalance leads to heightened preferences for calorie‐dense foods, indicating a shift towards more impulsive, reward‐driven eating behaviors 53 . Additionally, activity in the right inferior frontal gyrus, a region linked to inhibitory control, decreased during sleep restriction 52 . These effects are not limited to adolescents. Studies in adults have shown similar patterns of increased food reward responses following sleep restriction. For example, restricting sleep to 6 h/night for 4 days resulted in a higher reward response to food cues, evidenced as increased activation in several reward‐related brain regions (nucleus accumbens, caudate, putamen, and ventromedial prefrontal cortex), particularly when exposed to high‐calorie food images 52 . Similarly, in a randomized controlled cross‐over study involving 12 healthy men, a single night of total sleep deprivation led to greater activation in the right anterior cingulate cortex in response to food images, especially those depicting higher‐calorie foods. This was coupled with increased subjective hunger ratings 54 . Insufficient sleep may also change food preferences, with self‐reported hunger and appetite increasing by 24%, alongside a 33–45% increase in cravings for carbohydrate‐rich foods such as sweets and salty snacks 38 . Recently, it was reported that a lack of sleep triggers a change in the endocannabinoid system. Endocannabinoids are neurotransmitters involved in energy homeostasis, promoting energy storage by increasing appetite and food intake through central nervous system mechanisms. When healthy adults were sleep‐deprived to 4.5 h of sleep per night for 4 days, the 24‐h levels of the natural endocannabinoid 2‐arachidonoylglycerol increased by approximately 33% 44 . These results coincided with significantly increased levels of hunger ratings and a lower ability to inhibit intake of palatable foods assessed during an ad libitum meal test 44 . Similar results were found by Cederneades et al ., who reported that 3 days of sleep restriction (4 h/night) resulted in an 80% increase in plasma concentrations of 2‐arachidonoylglycerol and a 25% increase in hunger ratings during 3 days of sleep restriction (4.25 h/night) relative to regular sleep (8 h/night) 55 . Interestingly, this study also demonstrated that when exercising after sleep restriction, concentrations of 2‐arachidonoylglycerol decreased to levels similar to those during regular sleep without exercise, implying that exercise may counteract the adverse effects of sleep restriction on the endocannabinoid system 55 . The effects of sleep duration on cortisol levels are not entirely clear. Some studies report that sleep loss is associated with elevated cortisol levels in the late afternoon and evening 18 , 28 , 39 , and significantly lower levels in the morning, suggesting impaired recovery 39 , 56 . For example, among men, Wu et al . reported that morning serum cortisol levels decreased after 4 days of sleep restriction (3 h/night), with greater decreases after “late‐night” sleep loss (sleeping from midnight to 3:00 AM) than after “early‐night” sleep loss (sleeping from 3:00 AM to 6:00) 57 . This pattern resembles the effects of sleep restriction on ghrelin 49 . However, just a single night of recovery sleep abolished this effect 57 . By contrast, other studies reported no significant changes in cortisol levels after experimental sleep restriction 38 , 58 , 59 . Energy intake and expenditure and physical activity Several studies across different populations have found increased consumption of energy—especially from snacks—when individuals are sleep‐deprived 40 , 60 , 61 . Similarly, meta‐analyses of sleep restriction interventions in both normal‐weight adults and adults with overweight or obesity have found average increases in energy intake by 250–385 kcal/day following sleep restriction compared with recommended sleep duration 62 , 63 . Two experimental studies found that moderate sleep restriction (4–5.5 h/night) increased energy intake by approximately 300 kcal, especially from snacks 60 , 61 . Notably, 24‐h energy expenditure measured with the doubly labeled water did not change in these studies 60 , 61 . On the other hand, Markwald et al . found that healthy adults who slept 5 h/night consumed 6% more calories and 42% more snacks after dinner, but also had a 5% greater energy expenditure (measured with whole‐room calorimetry) 40 . This increase in energy expenditure in absolute terms was lower than the increase in energy intake, resulting in a positive energy balance and modest weight gain 40 . In a systematic review of 17 intervention studies ( n = 496), of which 11 studies ( n = 172) provided sufficient data to conduct a meta‐analysis, it was found that sleep restriction increases energy expenditure by ~88 kcal/day while it increases energy intake by ~385 kcal/day, resulting in a net positive energy balance by almost 300 kcal/day 63 . Staying awake for longer attenuates the normal dip in energy expenditure during nighttime, but at the same time provides more opportunities for snacking which, combined with dysregulated appetite regulation, can lead to positive energy balance and weight gain 21 . It is not entirely clear whether sleep restriction influences the level of physical activity. In a cross‐sectional study with 48 healthy young adults with a parental history of type 2 diabetes, participants completed approximately 2 weeks of objective sleep and physical activity measures while following their usual lifestyle. Compared to participants who slept ≥6 h/night, short sleepers had 27% fewer daily activity counts, spent less time in moderate‐to‐vigorous physical activity (MVPA), and more time being sedentary 64 . Similar results were obtained in a randomized cross‐over trial of 18 healthy young adults with a parental history of type 2 diabetes. One week of sleep restriction (5.5 h/night) was associated with reduced total activity counts by 31%, reduced time spent on MVPA by 24%, and more sedentary time compared with regular sleep (8.5 h/night) 65 . Overall, sleep‐deprived individuals tend to spend less time on physical activity during the daytime, which may well be due to daytime sleepiness or tiredness. In children, sleep restriction has also been shown to impact eating behaviors. Hart et al . 66 conducted a randomized cross‐over trial in which 37 prepubescent children (aged 8–11 years) underwent 1‐week periods during which bedtime was manipulated to result in increased or decreased sleep duration relative to their habitual schedule (9.5 h/night). Compared with the “extended sleep” week, children slept 141 min/night less during the “restricted sleep” week and consumed 134 kcal/day more. Most of the increase in energy intake (103 kcal or 77% of total) occurred during the extra time of the day when children were awake 66 . Sleep restriction coincided with later consumption of afternoon meals (snacks and dinner) by ~35 min. In a subsequent study, the same investigators reported that restricted sleep, compared to extended sleep, resulted in increased television viewing by 1 h per day, but no differences in the amount of time spent on MVPA 67 . Taken together, these results indicate that sleep restriction facilitates increased energy intake, partly because of more opportunities to consume food (while being awake) and partly because of altered eating behaviors and appetite regulation. At the same time, energy expenditure increases, but this is simply because of the longer time staying awake, because most of this extra time is spent being sedentary. Although it is clear that short‐term sleep loss leads to energy imbalance, further studies are warranted to establish the long‐term effects of reduced sleep duration on food intake, energy expenditure, and body weight regulation. In combination with the detrimental effects on glucoregulation, insufficient sleep may be causally linked to diabesity (Figure 2 ). CLINICAL EFFECTS OF SLEEP EXTENSION Metabolic and cardiovascular health Although evidence is still limited, promising results have been reported regarding the effects of sleep extension on glucose metabolism in individuals with different baseline metabolic profiles 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 . A study by Killick et al . in habitually short‐sleeping (&lt;6.5 h/night) males found that 3 days of extended sleep (+37%, corresponding to 3 h and 18 min more sleep per night) led to significantly lower fasting plasma insulin levels compared with habitual sleep 69 . Another study investigated the effects of extended sleep for a whole week on metabolic markers in 32 adolescents with obesity, a group at high risk of developing hyperglycemia and prediabetes 70 . Here, sleep extension (~1 h/night) significantly increased whole‐body insulin sensitivity (Matsuda index) by 20%, reduced fasting insulin levels, and improved β‐cell function. These improvements led to better glucose homeostasis, evidenced as a greater prevalence of biphasic glucose curves (generally considered to be the shape that represents healthy processing of glucose) during sleep extension than during habitual sleep (40% vs 11%, respectively) 70 . Furthermore, sleep extension improved some aspects of the lipid profile, that is, decreased triglyceride levels and decreased the triglyceride‐to‐HDL cholesterol ratio 70 . Similar benefits have been observed among adults. In a controlled trial involving short‐sleeping (&lt;7 h/night during weekdays) adults without obesity, 6 weeks of sleep extension by 44–54 min/night significantly improved the insulin‐to‐glucose ratio, insulin sensitivity, and fasting insulin levels 68 . Interestingly, this study provided evidence that light sleep (stage N2) may be particularly important for mediating the effects of sleep duration on insulin and glucose homeostasis. Increased time spent in this sleep stage was significantly associated with reduced fasting insulin levels and lower insulin resistance (HOMA and insulin‐to‐glucose ratio) and greater insulin sensitivity (QUICKI) 68 . These results are supported by Hartescu et al . who also showed that a 6‐week sleep extension intervention (by an additional 72 min/night) brought about improvements in various metabolic outcomes (glucose tolerance, insulin resistance, and appetite‐related hormones) in a sample of short‐sleeping (≤6.5 h/night) men with overweight or obesity 71 . These studies suggest that modest sleep extension (1–1.5 h per night) significantly improves insulin sensitivity, fasting insulin levels, and blood glucose regulation, supporting the possibility that sleep duration is a modifiable risk factor directly affecting metabolic health. Interestingly, a study with short‐sleeping (≤6 h/night) females aged 20–55 years also found beneficial effects on metabolic parameters (improved insulin resistance and β‐cell function), but only for those participants who managed to extend their sleep by ~60 min 72 . Yet no significant benefits were documented for the group as a whole, who increased their sleep by an average of ~30 min. This suggests that the benefits of extending sleep may manifest only after exceeding a specific threshold. However, another study by Reynold et al . in females aged 18–55 years found that an increase in total sleep duration by ~66 min/night did not improve metabolic markers and, in fact, caused adverse effects on inflammation (a twofold increase in interleukin‐6 levels) 73 . In that study, however, generally healthy sleepers (6–8 h/night) were recruited. Therefore, the impact of sleep extension may depend not only on the magnitude of the extension but also on baseline sleep habits 73 . The beneficial effects of sleep extension may even apply to patients with prediabetes or those who have already developed type 2 diabetes. In a parallel randomized controlled trial with 69 adults with various degrees of hyperglycemia, a sleep education intervention improved self‐reported sleep quality (60% in the intervention group vs 29% in the control group) and self‐reported sleep duration (57% in the intervention group achieved &gt;6 h/night vs 29% in the control group). These changes coincided with decreased fasting glucose concentrations at the 3‐month follow‐up and significantly lower HbA1c levels at both follow‐up visits (by −0.39% at 3 months and by −0.66% at 6 months), indicating improved long‐term glucose control 74 . Beyond its effects on metabolic outcomes, sleep extension has been consistently shown to significantly reduce blood pressure 34 , 71 , 75 , 76 , which has obvious benefits for cardiovascular health. Appetite regulation Only a few studies have evaluated whether sleep extension can reduce energy intake or lead to healthier food choices. Al Khatib et al . investigated 42 normal‐weight adults who were short sleepers (5–&lt;7 h/night) 77 and found that 4 weeks of sleep extension (by ~21 min/night) reduced intake of free sugars significantly by 9.6 g/day compared to the control group 77 . However, no differences were found for energy expenditure, physical activity, or markers of cardiometabolic health between the sleep extension and control groups. These results suggest that improving sleep duration may be a feasible strategy to lower excessive sugar consumption in the form of unhealthy snacks, which is likely to be beneficial amidst the modern obesogenic environment 77 . Similarly, in a study of 10 young short‐sleeping (&lt;6.5 h/night) adults with overweight, increasing sleep by 1.6 h/night for 2 weeks decreased subjective feelings of appetite and the desire for sweet and salty foods by 14% and 62%, respectively 78 . A larger parallel randomized controlled trial involving adults with overweight ( n = 80) demonstrated that 2 weeks of sleep extension (by 1.2 h/night) led to a significant reduction in energy intake by 270 kcal/day (95% CI, −393 to −147 kcal/day) compared to the habitual sleep group 79 . In addition, changes in sleep duration were inversely correlated with changes in energy intake ( r = −0.41), supporting the notion that longer sleep could help regulate energy intake. This study did not assess changes in appetite hormones 79 . While a few studies suggest that extending sleep may lead to healthier food choices and reduced food intake, further research is needed to confirm these results, particularly in relation to their long‐term sustainability. Physical activity and inactivity Multiple studies have explored the effects of sleep extension on physical activity levels and sedentary behaviors. A randomized controlled cross‐over study in 18 short‐sleeping adolescents (5–7 h/school night) found that extending sleep by 71 min/night decreased sedentary time by ~53 min per day compared to habitual sleep. Noticeably, no changes were observed in light activity or MVPA 80 . These findings are supported by a study by Krietsch et al . with a similar 3‐week within‐subject cross‐over design involving 19 healthy adolescents. Longer sleep duration for 5 days resulted in 1.7 fewer hours per day spent in sedentary behaviors and 0.3 fewer hours spent in light physical activities 81 . Again, MVPA levels were not significantly affected 81 . Similarly, Devine et al . reported no significant changes in overall physical activity (assessed as average activity counts per minute) when comparing habitual sleep to sleep extension. However, increased sleep duration appeared to reduce the likelihood of participants having highly sedentary days (fewer incidences of &lt;100 activity counts over a 24‐h period) 82 . A recent study involving 26 college students found that longer sleep by ~43 min/night for a week significantly reduced sedentary time by 44 min/day. Again, changes in MVPA were not statistically significant 83 . Overall, these findings strongly suggest that the main effect of sleep extension is a reduction in sedentary during the day. In children, a randomized controlled cross‐over trial among 8–11‐year‐olds found that when sleep was extended (by 1.5 h/night), children were on average more active per minute during daytime, but total physical activity levels were lower compared to when sleep was restricted (by 1.5 h/night), simply due to reduced time spent being awake 67 . This indicates that while extended sleep might increase activity levels per unit of time, the total amount of activity may not change or even decrease due to the shorter time spent awake 67 . Like in adolescents and young adults, these findings in children suggest that sleep extension may be a strategy to reduce sedentary time. This effect may be clinically relevant as a systematic review on sedentary behavior among children and youth (5–17 years old) found that decreased sedentary behavior is consistently associated with lower BMI and better physical and psychosocial health 84 . Although evidence on the health effects of sleep extension is still limited and primarily comes from short‐term intervention studies, promising and encouraging results have been reported that support the observations from cross‐sectional studies 85 , 86 . Accordingly, extending sleep may be a practical approach to manage obesity and type 2 diabetes, although certainly more long‐term studies are needed, particularly among those at high risk. COGNITIVE BEHAVIORAL THERAPY AS A STRATEGY TO IMPROVE SLEEP CBT for insomnia Insomnia is the most prevalent sleep disorder characterized by chronic difficulty in falling asleep, maintaining sleep, or early waking despite having adequate opportunities for sleep for at least three times a week for at least 3 months, resulting in daytime functional impairment 87 . It affects approximately 40% of patients with type 2 diabetes 88 . CBT for insomnia (CBT‐I) is a multicomponent therapy that integrates behavioral and cognitive interventions to improve sleep by restoring homeostatic sleep drive, stabilizing circadian rhythm, and reducing hyperarousal in patients with insomnia 89 . It is recommended as the first‐line treatment for chronic insomnia in adults of any age, with or without comorbid psychiatric and medical conditions 90 , 91 , 92 , 93 . This recommendation is endorsed by the World Sleep Society 94 , 95 and is adopted internationally 96 . Adults diagnosed with chronic insomnia are recommended to receive CBT‐I as an initial treatment; pharmacological interventions may be considered only if CBT‐I is not effective 91 , 92 , 93 . CBT‐I can be delivered in‐person or digitally. In‐person CBT‐I is delivered face‐to‐face individually or in groups over 4–8 weekly sessions by a trained mental health professional. Digitally delivered CBT‐I with personal guidance is preferred over stand‐alone digital CBT‐I 93 , 95 . Several standardized CBT‐I protocols have been developed and widely adopted 97 , 98 , and include sleep window restriction, stimulus control, relaxation, cognitive restructuring, and sleep hygiene. Sleep window restriction and stimulus control are considered the most effective single‐component therapies for treating insomnia, albeit not as effective as multicomponent CBT‐I, whereas sleep hygiene alone is not considered effective 90 , 93 . Sleep window restriction refers to curtailing the sleep window to consolidate homeostatic sleep drive and increase sleep efficiency 99 . The initial sleep window is set to match the patient's current actual sleep duration, but it is usually set no less than 5 h per night. Once higher sleep efficiency is achieved, that is, 85–90%, the sleep window is gradually increased to reach the desired sleep duration while maintaining high sleep efficiency. Every titration of the sleep window involves a 15‐min change occurring no less than 10 days following any sleep schedule change 99 ; however, slight variations in this procedure have been observed across studies and clinicians. The idea is that restricting the sleep window increases homeostatic sleep drive, which overrides cognitive and physiological arousal that perpetuates insomnia 100 . Having a regular sleep schedule also entrains circadian rhythm and strengthens the association between the sleeping environment and sleep 100 . Stimulus control refers to the reconditioning of the sleeping environment to be a strong discriminant stimulus for the occurrence of sleep 101 . Patients are instructed to go to bed only when they are ready to fall asleep and to avoid engaging in any non‐sleep activities such as watching television, using their phones, or even just lying in bed without sleeping, which often leads to worrying and feeling frustrated about not falling asleep. They are instructed to leave the bed when they are unable to fall asleep within a quarter of an hour and to return to the bed when they feel a strong urge to fall asleep. This procedure strengthens the association between the sleeping environment and sleep while weakens the association between the sleeping environment and any non‐sleep activities, especially activities that are incompatible with sleep, that is, excitement, worrying, or feelings of frustration. Over repeated practices, the sleeping environment is re‐established as a strong discriminant stimulus for sleep and increases the likelihood of rapid sleep initiation and sleep maintenance. Sleep hygiene refers to identifying and modifying the patient's lifestyle habits and bedroom environmental factors that might affect sleep 100 . The goal is to support the patient to: (a) create a sleeping environment that is free of disruptions from light, noise, or heat; (b) maintain adequate daytime light exposure and activity levels; and (c) minimize activities that could elevate physiological arousal during nighttime such as caffeine and nicotine consumption, alcohol consumption, and intense exercise, eating too much, or exposure to bright light too close to bedtime. Although sleep hygiene alone is not considered sufficient or effective for improving insomnia, it is often included in CBT‐I to ensure that the patient is not engaging in habits that inadvertently disrupt sleep. Relaxation involves teaching patients formal exercises such as diaphragmatic breathing, progressive muscle relaxation, and visual imagery that are frequently used in behavioral therapy to reduce somatic and cognitive hyperarousal 100 . Patients are instructed to use relaxation as a skill that can be improved via frequent practice, and that it can be used to enhance their feelings of relaxation when needed, such as near bedtime. Lastly, cognitive restructuring involves identifying and modifying maladaptive thoughts that perpetuate sleep difficulties. It is a staple cognitive therapy technique used to reframe problematic thoughts that could lead to the maintenance of many different conditions such as depression and anxiety disorders 102 . Common beliefs that perpetuate insomnia include inaccurate beliefs about sleep, unrealistic expectations about sleep needs, thoughts that elevate distress associated with sleep, and thoughts that perpetuate maladaptive behaviors that can negatively impact sleep 103 . Altogether, these multiple components of CBT‐I work in tandem to eliminate behavioral and cognitive factors that maintain insomnia and subsequently improve sleep. The efficacy of CBT‐I in patients with type 2 diabetes CBT‐I has well‐established efficacy and effectiveness in the general population. Several randomized controlled trials have also been conducted to evaluate the efficacy of CBT‐I in patients with type 2 diabetes 104 , 105 , 106 , 107 , 108 . Efficacy is based on the clinical significance thresholds set forth by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine clinical guideline 90 , which requires the observation of post‐treatment differences between the intervention group and the control group in at least one of the following critical outcomes: (1) 0.5 standardized mean difference in sleep quality measured by subjective reports in daily sleep diary or by the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) 109 ; (2) 20‐min difference in diary‐measured sleep latency; (3) 20‐min difference in diary‐measured wake after sleep onset (WASO); (4) 10% difference in remission rate, indicated by a score &lt; 8 on the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) 110 , a score ≤5 on the PSQI, or &lt;31 min of sleep latency or WASO; or (5) 10% or greater difference in the responder rate, indicated by ≥8‐point reduction in the ISI or 0.5 standard‐deviation improvement in sleep latency and/or WASO. Alshehri et al . examined the efficacy of a 6‐session, in‐person, group‐based CBT‐I intervention in a small sample of 28 patients who reported to have diagnosed type 2 diabetes and have insomnia symptoms consistent with the diagnosis of chronic insomnia and a score &gt; 10 on the ISI 104 , 105 . At post‐treatment, participants in the CBT‐I group showed statistically and clinically significant improvements in the insomnia responder rate—85% of participants in the CBT‐I group were responders to treatment based on the 8‐point change in the ISI compared to 15% of participants in the health education control group 104 . CBT‐I recipients also had statistically significant improvements in the ISI, PSQI, diary measures of sleep latency, WASO, sleep efficiency, and the number of night awakenings. CBT‐I recipients were also found to have greater improvements in depressive and anxiety symptoms, glycemic control, diabetes self‐care behavior, and fatigue compared to those in the control group, with a −0.05% absolute percentage reduction in the HbA1c relative to a +0.03% absolute percentage increase in the control group 104 , 105 . Groenveld et al . is the only published study of an online version of CBT‐I in a sample of 57 adults with type 2 diabetes and reported insomnia symptoms consistent with the diagnosis of chronic insomnia. These investigators found that CBT‐I recipients experienced statistically significant improvements in insomnia symptoms, depressive symptoms, and anxiety symptoms compared to the participants who received usual care only 106 . The reductions in ISI at 3 and 6 months from baseline were 2.3 and 2.5 points, respectively, in the intention to treat analysis including participants who dropped out. In the per protocol analysis, the reductions in the ISI reached 3.8 and 4.5 points (at 3 and 6 months from baseline, respectively), short of the 8‐point difference considered clinically significant. Remission rates and responder rates of insomnia were not reported. No significant improvements in glycemic control and metabolic outcomes were observed. Zuo et al . evaluated if CBT‐I delivered by trained general practitioners improved sleep quality measured by the PSQI in a large sample of 187 patients with diagnosed type 2 diabetes and a score on the PSQI &gt;7 107 . They found that CBT‐I recipients had statistically and clinically significant improvements in the PSQI, HbA1c, and diabetes quality of life compared to the participants in the usual care condition. The CBT‐I group had lower PSQI scores than the control group at the 2‐month (SMD = 0.95) and 6‐month (SMD = 2.07) follow‐up visits. There was no significant difference in HbA1c between groups at 2 months, but a significant difference was observed at 6 months with an effect size of 0.34 (lower by 0.89 percent units in the CBT‐I group than in the control group). Similarly, Zhang et al . evaluated if CBT delivered by general practitioners could improve sleep in a large sample of 1,033 patients with comorbid type 2 diabetes and insomnia 108 . The CBT delivered included psychoeducation about sleep and diabetes, sleep hygiene, relaxation, stress management, and communication skills, but did not include key CBT‐I components such as sleep window restriction and stimulus control. CBT recipients had significantly greater improvements in PSQI than the control group; however, the improvement did not amount to clinical significance (SMD = 0.25 at 2 months, 0.19 at 6 months, and 0.36 at 12 months). The improvement in HbA1c was not statistically significant at the 2‐month and 6‐month visits, but it reached statistical significance at the 12‐month visit (SMD = 0.04 at 2 months, 0.14 at 6 months, and 0.27 at 12 months). Taken together, CBT‐I is an efficacious treatment for insomnia in people with comorbid insomnia and type 2 diabetes, delivered face‐to‐face or online, whereas its efficacy on glycemic control has not been observed consistently across studies. Of its effects on sleep outcomes, variation has been observed across studies which could be attributable to: (a) whether CBT‐I was delivered in‐person or digitally, with in‐person delivery achieving greater improvements, consistent with previous findings in the general population 111 ; and (b) whether key components of CBT‐I were included and delivered by trained professionals. The effect of CBT‐I on glycemic control is also inconsistent, which might be attributable to the following reasons. First, sleep homeostasis and circadian misalignment are believed to influence glycemic control, suggesting that CBT‐I may influence glycemic control via improvements in sleep outcomes. Hence, the effects of CBT‐I on improving glycemic control will depend on whether or not clinically significant improvements in sleep outcomes are achieved. Second, some of the recommendations on CBT‐I may directly impact glycemic control. For instance, maintaining adequate levels of daytime activities and reducing nighttime food consumption may directly influence glycemic control. Hence, patients' adherence to these recommendations will determine the net effect of CBT‐I on glycemic control. Challenges and opportunities One of the challenges in applying CBT‐I in patients with diabesity is the management of comorbid sleep apnea. The prevalence of sleep apnea in patients with diabesity is high 112 , and sleep apnea is frequently comorbid with insomnia in the general population 113 . This means that a large number of patients with diabesity will have comorbid sleep apnea and insomnia. The presence of sleep apnea can complicate the evaluation and treatment of insomnia, and the presence of insomnia also impacts patients' adherence to continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), the most effective treatment of sleep apnea. For instance, insomnia and sleep apnea have overlapping symptoms such as difficulty maintaining sleep, having non‐restorative sleep, and feelings of daytime fatigue and sleepiness. Accurate evaluation of both disorders requires multidisciplinary efforts including the integration of clinical interviews, sleep diaries and questionnaires, and polysomnography 114 . Untreated sleep apnea may diminish the effects of CBT‐I because sleep‐breathing events can elevate the difficulty in maintaining sleep and reduce the effectiveness of sleep window restriction and stimulus control strategies. Similarly, the presence of insomnia can increase difficulty for patients to use CPAP because using CPAP may elevate sleep‐related anxiety commonly present in patients with comorbid insomnia. Concurrent treatments may be optimal for patients with comorbid insomnia and sleep apnea, but patient‐centered preferences should be considered in the shared decision‐making regarding the sequence of treatments 113 , 114 . Such a multidisciplinary approach has the potential to improve sleep, CPAP adherence, and glycemic control, although much more research is needed to evaluate how best to integrate the care for both problems in patients with diabesity. The other challenge and opportunity lie in the design and use of digital CBT‐I. Similar to the findings in the general population 111 , digital CBT‐I applied to patients with type 2 diabetes resulted in smaller improvements in insomnia than in‐person CBT‐I. Guided digital CBT‐I is recommended over unguided digital CBT‐I 93 , 95 . However, a model specifying how best to integrate digital CBT‐I and human support is lacking. Research on the efficacy of adding different types of human support to digital CBT‐I is scarce. Some preliminary findings suggest that a well‐designed digital CBT‐I may achieve equal efficacy at post‐treatment, and adding brief therapist support to reinforce CBT‐I learning may improve long‐term outcomes 115 . It is likely that existing digital CBT‐I has not achieved optimal digital adaptation of CBT‐I, thereby hindering the actualization of its full efficacy. Given the rapid advancement of technology, especially the application of generative artificial intelligence and digital twin in personalized medicine 116 , research in optimizing the digitalization of CBT‐I will remain one of the most fruitful avenues to improving sleep, and potentially glycemic control, at a larger scale in patients with diabesity. SUMMARY AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS There is no doubt that inadequate sleep, at least in terms of duration (which is the most extensively studied parameter of sleep habit, likely because it is the easiest to quantify), is associated with increased risk of developing obesity and type 2 diabetes. Various studies have provided evidence about the existence of mechanistic links between sleep loss and appetite dysregulation, leading to overconsumption of calories to an extent that is probably greater than what could be explained simply by the extra time being awake. This increase in energy intake overcompensates for the increase in energy expenditure due to the additional wakefulness and results in positive energy balance which can lead to weight gain. This, in itself, negatively affects glucose homeostasis and the risk of diabetes. However, sleep restriction has unfavorable effects on glucose metabolism even independently of changes in dietary intake and body weight—sleep loss induces low‐grade inflammation and insulin resistance without compensatory insulin secretion, facilitating the development of hyperglycemia. Given that short sleep is likely causally linked to the pathogenesis of obesity and diabetes, it is not surprising that sleep extension beneficially affects energy balance, body weight, and glucose homeostasis. Although studies are still scarce, they generally provide encouraging results: sleep extension among patients with obesity or diabetes who habitually sleep less than the recommended results in healthier food choices, reduced energy intake, lower blood pressure, and improved biomarkers of insulin resistance and glucose control. CBT‐based therapies have emerged as a very effective strategy to improve sleep habits in people with and without diabetes, although most data on this are derived from studies in patients with diagnosed insomnia. Furthermore, the extent of improvement in sleep habits that is required to obtain physiologically significant health benefits remains uncertain. These questions should be addressed in future studies. Last but not least, a much‐understudied aspect of the relationship between sleep and diabesity is the role of sleep quality, and how duration and quality interact to affect health. For example, a randomized parallel study in which children and adolescents were randomized to sleep extension or sleep restriction relative to their habitual schedule found that parameters related to sleep quality improved relative to baseline after sleep restriction whereas, perhaps surprisingly, worsened after sleep extension 117 . Suboptimal sleep quality in some individuals could thus underlie the unfavorable relationships documented between long sleep and metabolic disease. But clearly, much remains to be learned about the importance of sleep quality. Accordingly, it is not unreasonable to suggest that, in the foreseeable future, implementation of simple and relatively inexpensive strategies to improve sleep habits and their widespread application could help combat the rising epidemic of diabesity and its medical consequences. DISCLOSURE APSK has received research grants and/or speaker honoraria from Abbott, Astra Zeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Dexcom, Eli‐Lilly, Kyowa Kirin, Merck Serono, Merck Sharp &amp; Dohme, Nestle, Novo‐Nordisk, Pfizer, Sanofi, and Zuellig Pharma. Other authors declared no conflict of interest associated with the contents of this manuscript. Approval of the research protocol: N/A. Informed consent: N/A. Registry and the registration no. of the study/trial: N/A. Animal studies: N/A. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The work described in this manuscript was partially supported by funding from Health and Medical Research Fund (HMRF), Food and Health Bureau, Hong Kong SAR, China (Reference number: 18190241); Area of Excellence Scheme, Research Grants Council, Hong Kong SAR, China (Reference number: AoE/M‐401/24‐R); and the Novo Nordisk Foundation, Hellerup, Denmark (Reference number: NNF22SA0081765). Contributor Information Faidon Magkos, Email: fma@nexs.ku.dk. Alice PS Kong, Email: alicekong@cuhk.edu.hk. REFERENCES 1. Garber AJ, Handelsman Y, Grunberger G, et al . Consensus statement by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American College of Endocrinology on the comprehensive type 2 diabetes management algorithm ‐ 2020 executive Summary. Endocr Pract 2020; 26: 107–139. 2. Afshin A, Forouzanfar MH, Reitsma MB, et al . Health effects of overweight and obesity in 195 countries over 25 years. N Engl J Med 2017; 377: 13–27. 3. WHO . Obesity and overweight. 4. International Diabetes Federation . IDF Atlas, 10th edn. Brussels: International Diabetes Federation, 2021. 5. Luckhaupt SE, Tak S, Calvert GM. The prevalence of short sleep duration by industry and occupation in the National Health Interview Survey. Sleep 2010; 33: 149–159. 6. Kakizaki M, Kuriyama S, Nakaya N, et al . Long sleep duration and cause‐specific mortality according to physical function and self‐rated health: the Ohsaki Cohort Study. J Sleep Res 2013; 22: 209–216. 7. Patel SR, Malhotra A, Gottlieb DJ, et al . Correlates of long sleep duration. Sleep 2006; 29: 881–889. 8. Chen CX, Zhang JH, Li SX, et al . Secular trends in sleep and circadian problems among adolescents in Hong Kong: From 2011–2012 to 2017–2019. Sleep Med 2024; 117: 62–70. 9. Lim LL, Tse G, Choi KC, et al . Temporal changes in obesity and sleep habits in Hong Kong Chinese school children: A prospective study. Sci Rep 2019; 9: 5881. 10. Cappuccio FP, Taggart FM, Kandala NB, et al . Meta‐analysis of short sleep duration and obesity in children and adults. Sleep 2008; 31: 619–626. 11. Chen X, Beydoun MA, Wang Y. Is sleep duration associated with childhood obesity? A systematic review and meta‐analysis. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2008; 16: 265–274. 12. Fatima Y, Doi SA, Mamun AA. Longitudinal impact of sleep on overweight and obesity in children and adolescents: A systematic review and bias‐adjusted meta‐analysis. Obes Rev 2015; 16: 137–149. 13. Guimarães KC, Silva CM, Latorraca COC, et al . Is self‐reported short sleep duration associated with obesity? A systematic review and meta‐analysis of cohort studies. Nutr Rev 2022; 80: 983–1000. 14. Hart CN, Cairns A, Jelalian E. Sleep and obesity in children and adolescents. Pediatr Clin N Am 2011; 58: 715–733. 15. Kong AP, Choi KC, Zhang J, et al . Curvilinear associations of sleep patterns during weekdays and weekends with glycemic control in type 2 diabetes: The Hong Kong Diabetes Registry. Acta Diabetol 2017; 54: 151–162. 16. Wang C, Bangdiwala SI, Rangarajan S, et al . Association of estimated sleep duration and naps with mortality and cardiovascular events: A study of 116,632 people from 21 countries. Eur Heart J 2019; 40: 1620–1629. 17. Cai H, Shu XO, Xiang YB, et al . Sleep duration and mortality: A prospective study of 113,138 middle‐aged and elderly Chinese men and women. Sleep 2015; 38: 529–536. 18. Leproult R, Copinschi G, Buxton O, et al . Sleep loss results in an elevation of cortisol levels the next evening. Sleep 1997; 20: 865–870. 19. Spiegel K, Leproult R, Van Cauter E. Impact of sleep debt on metabolic and endocrine function. Lancet 1999; 354: 1435–1439. 20. Ding C, Zhang J, Lau ESH, et al . Gender differences in the associations between insomnia and glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes: A cross‐sectional study. Sleep 2019; 42: zsz014. 21. Chaput JP, McHill AW, Cox RC, et al . The role of insufficient sleep and circadian misalignment in obesity. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2023; 19: 82–97. 22. Ding C, Lim LL, Xu L, et al . Sleep and obesity. J Obes Metab Syndr 2018; 27: 4–24. 23. Duez H, Staels B. Circadian disruption and the risk of developing obesity. Curr Obes Rep 2025; 14: 20. 24. Buxton OM, Cain SW, O'Connor SP, et al . Adverse metabolic consequences in humans of prolonged sleep restriction combined with circadian disruption. Sci Transl Med 2012; 4: 129ra43. 25. Zhang J, Ma RC, Kong AP, et al . Relationship of sleep quantity and quality with 24‐hour urinary catecholamines and salivary awakening cortisol in healthy middle‐aged adults. Sleep 2011; 34: 225–233. 26. Rao MN, Neylan TC, Grunfeld C, et al . Subchronic sleep restriction causes tissue‐specific insulin resistance. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015; 100: 1664–1671. 27. Tasali E, Leproult R, Ehrmann DA, et al . Slow‐wave sleep and the risk of type 2 diabetes in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008; 105: 1044–1049. 28. Buxton OM, Pavlova M, Reid EW, et al . Sleep restriction for 1 week reduces insulin sensitivity in healthy men. Diabetes 2010; 59: 2126–2133. 29. Nedeltcheva AV, Kessler L, Imperial J, et al . Exposure to recurrent sleep restriction in the setting of high caloric intake and physical inactivity results in increased insulin resistance and reduced glucose tolerance. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009; 94: 3242–3250. 30. Broussard JL, Ehrmann DA, Van Cauter E, et al . Impaired insulin signaling in human adipocytes after experimental sleep restriction: A randomized, crossover study. Ann Intern Med 2012; 157: 549–557. 31. Sweeney EL, Jeromson S, Hamilton DL, et al . Skeletal muscle insulin signaling and whole‐body glucose metabolism following acute sleep restriction in healthy males. Physiol Rep 2017; 5: e13498. 32. Herzog N, Jauch‐Chara K, Hyzy F, et al . Selective slow wave sleep but not rapid eye movement sleep suppression impairs morning glucose tolerance in healthy men. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2013; 38: 2075–2082. 33. DeFronzo RA, Ferrannini E, Groop L, et al . Type 2 diabetes mellitus. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2015; 1: 15019. 34. Haack M, Sanchez E, Mullington JM. Elevated inflammatory markers in response to prolonged sleep restriction are associated with increased pain experience in healthy volunteers. Sleep 2007; 30: 1145–1152. 35. Prather AA, Puterman E, Epel ES, et al . Poor sleep quality potentiates stress‐induced cytokine reactivity in postmenopausal women with high visceral abdominal adiposity. Brain Behav Immun 2014; 35: 155–162. 36. Irwin MR, Wang M, Campomayor CO, et al . Sleep deprivation and activation of morning levels of cellular and genomic markers of inflammation. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166: 1756–1762. 37. Engert LC, Mullington JM, Haack M. Prolonged experimental sleep disturbance affects the inflammatory resolution pathways in healthy humans. Brain Behav Immun 2023; 113: 12–20. 38. Spiegel K, Tasali E, Penev P, et al . Brief communication: Sleep curtailment in healthy young men is associated with decreased leptin levels, elevated ghrelin levels, and increased hunger and appetite. Ann Intern Med 2004; 141: 846–850. 39. Omisade A, Buxton OM, Rusak B. Impact of acute sleep restriction on cortisol and leptin levels in young women. Physiol Behav 2010; 99: 651–656. 40. Markwald RR, Melanson EL, Smith MR, et al . Impact of insufficient sleep on total daily energy expenditure, food intake, and weight gain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110: 5695–5700. 41. van Egmond LT, Meth EMS, Engstrom J, et al . Effects of acute sleep loss on leptin, ghrelin, and adiponectin in adults with healthy weight and obesity: A laboratory study. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2023; 31: 635–641. 42. Schmid SM, Hallschmid M, Jauch‐Chara K, et al . A single night of sleep deprivation increases ghrelin levels and feelings of hunger in normal‐weight healthy men. J Sleep Res 2008; 17: 331–334. 43. St‐Onge MP, O'Keeffe M, Roberts AL, et al . Short sleep duration, glucose dysregulation and hormonal regulation of appetite in men and women. Sleep 2012; 35: 1503–1510. 44. Hanlon EC, Tasali E, Leproult R, et al . Sleep restriction enhances the daily rhythm of circulating levels of endocannabinoid 2‐arachidonoylglycerol. Sleep 2016; 39: 653–664. 45. Schmid SM, Hallschmid M, Jauch‐Chara K, et al . Short‐term sleep loss decreases physical activity under free‐living conditions but does not increase food intake under time‐deprived laboratory conditions in healthy men. Am J Clin Nutr 2009; 90: 1476–1482. 46. Benedict C, Hallschmid M, Lassen A, et al . Acute sleep deprivation reduces energy expenditure in healthy men. Am J Clin Nutr 2011; 93: 1229–1236. 47. Broussard JL, Kilkus JM, Delebecque F, et al . Elevated ghrelin predicts food intake during experimental sleep restriction. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2016; 24: 132–138. 48. Simpson NS, Banks S, Dinges DF. Sleep restriction is associated with increased morning plasma leptin concentrations, especially in women. Biol Res Nurs 2010; 12: 47–53. 49. Meyhofer S, Chamorro R, Hallschmid M, et al . Late, but not early, night sleep loss compromises neuroendocrine appetite regulation and the desire for food. Nutrients 2023; 15: 2035. 50. Jensen CD, Duraccio KM, Barnett KA, et al . Sleep duration differentially affects brain activation in response to food images in adolescents with overweight/obesity compared to adolescents with normal weight. Sleep 2019; 42: zsz001. 51. Duraccio KM, Zaugg K, Jensen CD. Effects of sleep restriction on food‐related inhibitory control and reward in adolescents. J Pediatr Psychol 2019; 44: 692–702. 52. Demos KE, Sweet LH, Hart CN, et al . The effects of experimental manipulation of sleep duration on neural response to food cues. Sleep 2017; 40: zsx125. 53. Greer SM, Goldstein AN, Walker MP. The impact of sleep deprivation on food desire in the human brain. Nat Commun 2013; 4: 2259. 54. Benedict C, Brooks SJ, O'Daly OG, et al . Acute sleep deprivation enhances the brain's response to hedonic food stimuli: An fMRI study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012; 97: E443–E447. 55. Cedernaes J, Fanelli F, Fazzini A, et al . Sleep restriction alters plasma endocannabinoids concentrations before but not after exercise in humans. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2016; 74: 258–268. 56. Vgontzas AN, Zoumakis E, Bixler EO, et al . Adverse effects of modest sleep restriction on sleepiness, performance, and inflammatory cytokines. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004; 89: 2119–2126. 57. Wu H, Zhao Z, Stone WS, et al . Effects of sleep restriction periods on serum cortisol levels in healthy men. Brain Res Bull 2008; 77: 241–245. 58. Voderholzer U, Piosczyk H, Holz J, et al . The impact of increasing sleep restriction on cortisol and daytime sleepiness in adolescents. Neurosci Lett 2012; 507: 161–166. 59. Covassin N, Singh P, McCrady‐Spitzer SK, et al . Effects of experimental sleep restriction on energy intake, energy expenditure, and visceral obesity. J Am Coll Cardiol 2022; 79: 1254–1265. 60. St‐Onge MP, Roberts AL, Chen J, et al . Short sleep duration increases energy intakes but does not change energy expenditure in normal‐weight individuals. Am J Clin Nutr 2011; 94: 410–416. 61. Nedeltcheva AV, Kilkus JM, Imperial J, et al . Sleep curtailment is accompanied by increased intake of calories from snacks. Am J Clin Nutr 2009; 89: 126–133. 62. Zhu B, Shi C, Park CG, et al . Effects of sleep restriction on metabolism‐related parameters in healthy adults: A comprehensive review and meta‐analysis of randomized controlled trials. Sleep Med Rev 2019; 45: 18–30. 63. Al Khatib HK, Harding SV, Darzi J, et al . The effects of partial sleep deprivation on energy balance: A systematic review and meta‐analysis. Eur J Clin Nutr 2017; 71: 614–624. 64. Booth JN, Bromley LE, Darukhanavala AP, et al . Reduced physical activity in adults at risk for type 2 diabetes who curtail their sleep. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2012; 20: 278–284. 65. Bromley LE, Booth JN 3rd, Kilkus JM, et al . Sleep restriction decreases the physical activity of adults at risk for type 2 diabetes. Sleep 2012; 35: 977–984. 66. Hart CN, Carskadon MA, Considine RV, et al . Changes in children's sleep duration on food intake, weight, and leptin. Pediatrics 2013; 132: e1473‐80. 67. Hart CN, Hawley N, Davey A, et al . Effect of experimental change in children's sleep duration on television viewing and physical activity. Pediatr Obes 2017; 12: 462–467. 68. Leproult R, Deliens G, Gilson M, et al . Beneficial impact of sleep extension on fasting insulin sensitivity in adults with habitual sleep restriction. Sleep 2015; 38: 707–715. 69. Killick R, Hoyos CM, Melehan KL, et al . Metabolic and hormonal effects of ‘catch‐up’ sleep in men with chronic, repetitive, lifestyle‐driven sleep restriction. Clin Endocrinol 2015; 83: 498–507. 70. Dutil C, Podinic I, Featherstone RB, et al . Sleep and insulin sensitivity in adolescents at risk of type 2 diabetes: The sleep manipulation in adolescents at risk of type 2 diabetes randomized crossover study. Sleep 2024; 47: zsad313. 71. Hartescu I, Stensel DJ, Thackray AE, et al . Sleep extension and metabolic health in male overweight/obese short sleepers: A randomised controlled trial. J Sleep Res 2022; 31: e13469. 72. So‐Ngern A, Chirakalwasan N, Saetung S, et al . Effects of two‐week sleep extension on glucose metabolism in chronically sleep‐deprived individuals. J Clin Sleep Med 2019; 15: 711–718. 73. Reynold AM, Bowles ER, Saxena A, et al . Negative effects of time in bed extension: A pilot study. J Sleep Med Disord 2014; 1: 1002. 74. García‐Serrano C, Pujol Salud J, Aran‐Solé L, et al . Enhancing night and Day circadian contrast through sleep education in prediabetes and type 2 diabetes mellitus: A randomized controlled trial. Biology 2022; 11: 893. 75. Gonzales JU, Clark C, Dellinger JR. The effect of acute sleep extension on blood pressure is dependent on the change in sleep efficiency. Clocks Sleep 2024; 6: 546–556. 76. Baron KG, Duffecy J, Simonsen S, et al . Sleep technology intervention to target Cardiometabolic health (STITCH): A randomized controlled study of a behavioral sleep extension intervention compared to an education control to improve sleep duration, blood pressure, and cardiometabolic health among adults with elevated blood pressure/hypertension. Trials 2023; 24: 658. 77. Al Khatib HK, Hall WL, Creedon A, et al . Sleep extension is a feasible lifestyle intervention in free‐living adults who are habitually short sleepers: A potential strategy for decreasing intake of free sugars? A randomized controlled pilot study. Am J Clin Nutr 2018; 107: 43–53. 78. Tasali E, Chapotot F, Wroblewski K, et al . The effects of extended bedtimes on sleep duration and food desire in overweight young adults: A home‐based intervention. Appetite 2014; 80: 220–224. 79. Tasali E, Wroblewski K, Kahn E, et al . Effect of sleep extension on objectively assessed energy intake among adults with overweight in real‐life settings: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2022; 182: 365–374. 80. Van Dyk TR, Krietsch KN, Saelens BE, et al . Inducing more sleep on school nights reduces sedentary behavior without affecting physical activity in short‐sleeping adolescents. Sleep Med 2018; 47: 7–10. 81. Krietsch KN, Duraccio KM, Zhang N, et al . Earlier bedtimes and more sleep displace sedentary behavior but not moderate‐to‐vigorous physical activity in adolescents. Sleep Health 2022; 8: 270–276. 82. Devine JK, Burke TM, Skeiky L, et al . Objective changes in activity levels following sleep extension as measured by wrist actigraphy. Sleep Med 2019; 60: 173–177. 83. Mathew GM, Nahmod NG, Master L, et al . Effects of a 1‐hour per night week‐long sleep extension in college students on cardiometabolic parameters, hydration status, and physical activity: A pilot study. Sleep Health 2024; 10(1s): S130–S139. 84. Tremblay MS, LeBlanc AG, Kho ME, et al . Systematic review of sedentary behaviour and health indicators in school‐aged children and youth. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2011; 8: 98. 85. Nôga DA, Meth E, Pacheco AP, et al . Habitual short sleep duration, diet, and development of type 2 diabetes in adults. JAMA Netw Open 2024; 7: e241147. 86. Yaggi HK, Araujo AB, McKinlay JB. Sleep duration as a risk factor for the development of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2006; 29: 657–661. 87. American Psychiatric Association . Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edn. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association, 2022. 88. Koopman ADM, Beulens JW, Dijkstra T, et al . Prevalence of insomnia (symptoms) in T2D and association with metabolic parameters and glycemic control: Meta‐analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2020; 105: 614–643. 89. Baglioni C, Espie CA, Riemann D. Cognitive‐Behavioural Therapy for Insomnia (CBT‐I) across the Lifespan. Guidelines and Clinical Protocols for Health Professionals. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons Ltd, 2022. 90. Edinger JD, Arnedt JT, Bertisch SM, et al . Behavioral and psychological treatments for chronic insomnia disorder in adults: An American Academy of sleep medicine clinical practice guideline. J Clin Sleep Med 2021; 17: 255–262. 91. Qaseem A, Kansagara D, Forciea MA, et al . Management of Chronic Insomnia Disorder in adults: A clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 2016; 165: 125–133. 92. Riemann D, Baglioni C, Bassetti C, et al . European guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of insomnia. J Sleep Res 2017; 26: 675–700. 93. Riemann D, Espie CA, Altena E, et al . The European insomnia guideline: An update on the diagnosis and treatment of insomnia 2023. J Sleep Res 2023; 32: e14035. 94. Morin CM, Inoue Y, Kushida C, et al . Endorsement of European guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of insomnia by the world sleep society. Sleep Med 2021; 81: 124–126. 95. Morin CM, Bei B, Bjorvatn B, et al . World sleep society international sleep medicine guidelines position statement endorsement of “behavioral and psychological treatments for chronic insomnia disorder in adults: An American Academy of sleep medicine clinical practice guidelines”. Sleep Med 2023; 109: 164–169. 96. Choi H, Youn S, Um YH, et al . Korean clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of insomnia in adults. Psychiatry Investig 2020; 17: 1048–1059. 97. Edinger JD, Carney CE. Overcoming Insomnia: A Cognitive‐Behavioral Therapy Approach, Therapist Guide. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014. 98. Perlis ML, Jungquist C, Smith MT, et al . Cognitive Behavioral Treatment of Insomnia: A Session‐by‐Session Guide. New York, NY: Springer Science &amp; Business Media, 2005. 99. Spielman AJ, Saskin P, Thorpy MJ. Treatment of chronic insomnia by restriction of time in bed. Sleep 1987; 10: 45–56. 100. Espie CA. Standard CBT‐I protocol for the treatment of insomnia disorder. In: Baglioni C, Espie CA, Riemann D (eds). Cognitive‐Behavioural Therapy For Insomnia (CBT‐I) Across The Life Span. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2022; 17–41. 101. Bootzin R. A stimulus control treatment for insomnia. Proc Am Psychol Assoc 1972; 7: 395–396. 102. Beck AT. Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders. New York: Penguin Books, 1979. 103. Morin CM, Vallières A, Ivers H. Dysfunctional beliefs and attitudes about sleep (DBAS): Validation of a brief version (DBAS‐16). Sleep 2007; 30: 1547–1554. 104. Alshehri MM, Alenazi AM, Alothman SA, et al . Using cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia in people with type 2 diabetes, pilot RCT part I: Sleep and concomitant symptom. Behav Sleep Med 2021; 19: 652–671. 105. Alshehri MM, Alothman SA, Alenazi AM, et al . The effects of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia in people with type 2 diabetes mellitus, pilot RCT part II: Diabetes health outcomes. BMC Endocr Disord 2020; 20: 136. 106. Groeneveld L, Beulens JW, Blom MT, et al . The effect of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia on sleep and glycemic outcomes in people with type 2 diabetes: A randomized controlled trial. Sleep Med 2024; 120: 44–52. 107. Zuo X, Dong Z, Zhang P, et al . Effects of cognitive behavioral therapy on sleep disturbances and quality of life among adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A randomized controlled trial. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2020; 30: 1980–1988. 108. Zhang HZ, Zhang P, Chang GQ, et al . Effectiveness of cognitive behavior therapy for sleep disturbance and glycemic control in persons with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A community‐based randomized controlled trial in China. World J Diabetes 2021; 12: 292–305. 109. Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF 3rd, Monk TH, et al . The Pittsburgh sleep quality index: A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res 1989; 28: 193–213. 110. Morin CM, Belleville G, Bélanger L, et al . The insomnia severity index: Psychometric indicators to detect insomnia cases and evaluate treatment response. Sleep 2011; 34: 601–608. 111. Gao Y, Ge L, Liu M, et al . Comparative efficacy and acceptability of cognitive behavioral therapy delivery formats for insomnia in adults: A systematic review and network meta‐analysis. Sleep Med Rev 2022; 64: 101648. 112. Lam DC, Lui MM, Lam JC, et al . Prevalence and recognition of obstructive sleep apnea in Chinese patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Chest 2010; 138: 1101–1107. 113. Sweetman A, Lack L, Bastien C. Co‐morbid insomnia and sleep apnea (COMISA): Prevalence, consequences, methodological considerations, and recent randomized controlled trials. Brain Sci 2019; 9: 371. 114. Ong JC, Crawford MR, Wallace DM. Sleep apnea and insomnia: Emerging evidence for effective clinical management. Chest 2021; 159: 2020–2028. 115. Chan WS, Cheng WY, Lok SHC, et al . Assessing the short‐term efficacy of digital cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia with different types of coaching: Randomized controlled comparative trial. JMIR Ment Health 2024; 11: e51716. 116. Hassani H, Huang X, MacFeely S. Impactful digital twin in the healthcare revolution. Big Data Cogn Comput 2022; 6: 83. 117. Sadeh A, Gruber R, Raviv A. The effects of sleep restriction and extension on school‐age children: What a difference an hour makes. Child Dev 2003; 74: 444–455.