379 blackwellopen Journal of Research on Adolescence J Res Adolesc PMC12207709 12207709 12207709 40586161 10.1111/jora.70048 Unpacking social media's role in sociopolitical development amidst the dual pandemics: Perspectives of marginalized adolescent organizers Malorni Angie 1 ✉ Wilf Sara 2 1 School of Social Work, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA 2 Sociology, California State Polytechnic University Pomona, Pomona, California, USA * Correspondence , Angie Malorni, School of Social Work, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Brunswick, NJ, USA. Email: angie.malorni@rutgers.edu ✉ Corresponding author. 30 6 2025 35 3 e70048 e70048 1 7 2025 © 2025 The Author(s). Journal of Research on Adolescence published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society for Research on Adolescence. This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. Abstract “Dual pandemics” refers to the combination of COVID‐19 and structural racism in U.S. society—two forces that intersect to exacerbate inequities for marginalized and underrepresented communities. Today, we see marked differences in civic engagement for youth who were adolescents at the onset of the dual pandemics. Recent studies suggest that youth are disconnecting from political parties, and turnout among young voters has dropped. These shifts may affect youth sociopolitical values and civic behaviors in the coming years. It is challenging to understand if and how the youth experience during the dual pandemics may have affected sociopolitical development (SPD) without considering social media use. Social media had an outsized presence in youth's educational, social, and political lives during this time. In this study, we interviewed 11 racial and/or gender‐marginalized adolescent organizers (ages 14–19), asking them to reflect on social media's role in their sociopolitical development from the spring of 2020 until the fall of 2021. Our respondents reported an intensification of sociopolitical learning, decreased trust in United States. political institutions, and an increased sense of collective identity supporting their agency. Social media use contributed to a shift in youth organizing strategy to focus on digital organizing and mutual aid, a pendulum swing from high activity to burnout, and a centering of racial justice in all organizing spheres. The nuanced perspectives of youth in this study can inform social justice education with youth in the 2020s and help build stronger intergenerational movements for social change. Keywords: critical consciousness, dual pandemics, social media, sociopolitical development, youth, youth organizing status released display-pdf yes is-in-collection-domain yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Received 2024 Aug 7; Accepted 2025 Jun 14; Issue date 2025 Sep. INTRODUCTION The COVID‐19 pandemic profoundly affected teenagers' environment, opportunities for learning, and ways of connecting with others. Most in‐person learning spaces (e.g., schools, sports, clubs, and programs) were shut down, and youth had limited access to social group activities. With fewer in‐person opportunities, social media became increasingly central to learning about themselves, exploring their place in the world, and connecting with peers (Drouin et al., 2020 ; PEW Research Center, 2021 ). At the same time, the COVID‐19 pandemic illuminated long‐standing inequalities due to structural racism, which, alongside the increased Black Lives Matter protests in the spring and summer of 2020 following several instances of police brutality, led to increased attention to issues of structural racism. The consideration of COVID‐19 and structural racism in U.S. society together was referred to as the “dual pandemics,” reflecting how these two forces intersected to exacerbate inequities for marginalized and underrepresented communities (Bogan et al., 2022 ; Jones, 2021 ). The United States experienced a surge of political activity at the onset of the dual pandemics (e.g., the Black Lives Matter resurgence of 2020, Stop Anti‐Asian Hate, the response to the first election of Donald Trump), with social media playing a vital role in those social movements, particularly for young people (Wilf et al. 2023 ; Center for Information &amp; Research on Civic Learning and Engagement (CIRCLE)/Tisch College 2020 Post‐Election Youth Survey, 2021 ). The dual pandemics significantly affected adolescent mental health, relationships, and social development, and the mid‐ to long‐term effects of this sociohistorical moment are still being uncovered (Theron et al., 2023 ). Concerning sociopolitical values and civic engagement, recent surveys indicate marked differences between youth who are now 18–24 (i.e., 13–19 during the onset of the pandemic) and the cohort of young voters before them. A 2024 survey conducted by Berkeley's Democracy Policy Lab at the University of California found that this cohort leans more egalitarian than previous generations, with a greater desire to redistribute power and wealth, a stronger emphasis on fighting structural racism, and a more collectivist orientation. At the same time, this cohort is more fatalistic than previous cohorts, meaning that more transition‐age youth feel they have no agency and feel powerless in the face of major social and environmental crises, as well as our political system (Berkeley Initiative for Young Americans (BIFYA), n.d. ; Heys, 2024 ). As a result, youth across the right, left, and center are disconnecting or deflecting from political parties, and voter turnout of young voters dropped from 2020 to 2024 (BIFYA, n.d. ; Booth et al., 2023 ). These shifts may affect youth sociopolitical values and civic behaviors for years to come, as adolescent political beliefs and behavior can predict adult political beliefs and behavior (Flanagan &amp; Levine, 2010 ; Lundberg &amp; Abdelzadeh, 2025 ). Adolescence is an essential time for sociopolitical development (Hope et al., 2023 ; Watts &amp; Guessous, 2006 ). It is challenging to understand how the dual pandemics affected youth sociopolitical development (SPD) without considering the role of social media. Youth reported that social media contributed significantly to higher rates of political self‐education during this time (Wilf et al., 2023 ). For some youth, social media was the only space they accessed information and interacted with others during a transformational time (Yazdani et al., 2022 ). Some research has tangentially explored social media's role in youth organizing and activism during 2020. For example, Quiles et al. ( 2023 ) found that young people used social media during 2020 to organize in‐person actions and educate themselves about their positionality within the Black Lives Matter movement. However, research specifically with young activists and organizers exploring how social media played a role in their SPD during the dual pandemics is scarce. In this study, we aim to offer some possible explanations for the shift in youth SPD and civic engagement during the onset of the dual pandemics. We emphasize how youth used social media during this time, especially its outsized presence in young people's lives and its influence on sociopolitical learning and action. We conducted interviews with 11 youth organizers 1 year after the onset of COVID‐19. Our guiding research question was: How did social media influence youth SPD in the context of the dual pandemics of COVID‐19 and structural racism in 2020? With these insights, we can better understand how social media use during this unique sociohistorical moment may have shaped a generation's critical consciousness and orientation to political action. In turn, these insights can serve as a launching pad for further study and inform civic education and political engagement with adolescents and transition‐age youth in the years to come. Youth sociopolitical development Sociopolitical development (SPD) is a process whereby young people develop an awareness of structural inequities, a sense of agency, and take liberatory action to challenge oppressive systems (Watts et al., 2003 , 2011 ). For marginalized youth (including youth of color, poor and working class, immigrant, refugee, and LGBTQIA+ youth), SPD can act as a protective and promotive factor for positive youth development; mental, emotional, and physical health; and academic resilience (Christens &amp; Peterson, 2012 ; Godfrey et al., 2019 ; Poteat et al., 2020 ). SPD is a bidirectional interaction between individuals and their changing social contexts (Bronfenbrenner &amp; Ceci, 1994 ; Sherrod, 2007 , 2015 ). SPD is similar to the process of critical consciousness, whereby an individual develops the awareness and agency to take anti‐oppressive and liberatory action. Both frameworks are rooted in the theory and practice of Paulo Freire's critical consciousness pedagogy ( 2000 ), and both emphasize developing awareness and analysis of social, political, and economic conditions (Rapa &amp; Godfrey, 2023 ; Watts et al., 2003 ). However, the SPD framework integrates broader developmental and ecological perspectives (Christens et al., 2016 ; Diemer et al., 2016 ; Jemal, 2017 ; Jemal &amp; Bussey, 2018 ; Watts et al., 2011 ) and an added emphasis on skill building, principles of cognitive and identity development, attitudes, and environmental factors (Malorni et al., 2024 ; Hope et al., 2023 ; Nash et al., 2024 ). These factors make SPD a helpful framework in understanding how the environment of social media could shape youth political development during key sociopolitical periods. Current models of youth SPD include interconnected constructs of critical reflection, agency, also sometimes called efficacy or critical motivation, and critical action. Critical reflection refers to (1) thinking critically about accepted assumptions, beliefs, feelings, and ideas, (2) uncovering the hidden interests underlying personal, social, and cultural beliefs or assumptions, (3) being able to identify historical root causes of inequality that continue to impact present‐day ways of life, particularly interpersonal, internalized, and structural dimensions of oppression (Diemer et al., 2017 ; Diemer &amp; Blustein, 2016 ; Seider et al., 2020 ; Watts et al., 2003 ). Examples of critical action can include signing petitions, offering aid to individuals, doing civic engagement work, joining social justice organizations, participating in political party activities or campaigns, wearing political messages on clothing, activism, joining cultural and ethnic organizations, and action involving community‐based initiatives or campaigns outside conventional institutions (Ballard et al., 2020 ; Diemer et al., 2017 ; Gaby, 2017 ; Watts &amp; Flanagan, 2007 ). Critical reflection and critical action are theorized to have a bidirectional relationship and are moderated by political self‐efficacy and agency, as well as the availability of meaningful opportunity structures, including social media and community organizations (Ginwright, 2005 , 2007 ; Watts &amp; Flanagan, 2007 ). Involvement in critical action is multidimensional and can include both “conventional” actions, such as voting, and “social cause” actions, such as protesting, aimed at improving and shaping one's community (Adler &amp; Goggin, 2005 ; Anyiwo et al., 2020 ). Although research has focused on the SPD process with youth holding a variety of identities, such as immigrant youth of color (Quiles‐Kwock et al., 2024 ), scarce research centers on youth organizers to explore how social media may shape their political development. The dual pandemics as context for youth SPD The “dual pandemics” of COVID‐19 and structural racism created a unique sociopolitical context for young people's SPD in 2020 and beyond (Bogan et al., 2022 ; Jones, 2021 ), as the pandemic illuminated ways that structural racism has always been entrenched in American social, economic, and political institutions (Gee et al., 2023 ; Geyton et al., 2023 ; Jones, 2021 ). The health crisis, including contentious societal debates over government mandates (Wegemer &amp; von Keyserlingk, 2022 ) combined with a spike in anti‐Asian racism (Stop AAPI Hate, 2023 ), combined with a spike in anti‐Asian racism (Stop AAPI Hate, 2023 ) and the spring 2020 Black Lives Matter protests created a unique sociopolitical context for young people's political development. Organizers from diverse social movements came together during the pandemic to form mutual aid networks, then pivoted toward the movement for racial justice after George Floyd's murder in May 2020 (Silva, 2022 ). However, little is known about how this convergence of organizing around racial justice may have impacted young adult organizers during a critical developmental period. Further, the COVID‐19 pandemic disrupted nearly all young people's primary contexts for learning and social development, ranging from community spaces to schools and faith institutions, forcing most youth to turn to social media for sociopolitical information and social connections (Wilf et al., 2023 ). Particularly for young organizers who were already adept at using technology prior to 2020, during the pandemic social media became a critical context for them to learn about structural inequities happening in real time and to mobilize others to take action (Wilf et al., 2024 ). Although research has documented how the dual pandemics shaped youth SPD (Quiles‐Kwock et al., 2024 ), less research has focused specifically on young activists and organizers to understand how they processed and changed due to the unique sociopolitical context. Social media and youth SPD The digital world is a critical space for youth to educate themselves about sociopolitical issues, gain an awareness of structural inequities (Reynolds &amp; Mayweather, 2017 ), build a sense of agency in their ability to effect change (George Mwangi et al., 2018 ), and engage in individual and collective actions to challenge injustice and imagine better futures (Kelly, 2018 ; Stornaiuolo &amp; Thomas, 2017 ). Amid the dual pandemics, youth utilized social media as a tool to further their own and their peers' sociopolitical development (Choi et al., 2023 ; Fine et al., 2021 ; Karras et al., 2022 ; Quiles et al., 2023 ; Yeh et al., 2022 ). However, further research is needed, specifically with youth organizers, to explore how social media affects their SPD processes, particularly in the key sociopolitical moment of 2020. Extant research shows that social media can further young organizers' SPD by giving them opportunities to educate themselves and provide them with avenues to increase critical reflection among their peers as well (Wilf et al., 2022 ). However, gaining critical reflection on social media through exposure to information about structural injustice may also affect how young organizers perceive democratic institutions. Prior research shows that political activism and civil disobedience among Danish adult activists can result in a loss of trust in institutions (Toubøl, 2019 ). In the United States, trust in institutions and government has been declining among both youth and adults (Pew Research Center, 2024 ; Springtide, 2024 ). Yet scant research explores whether social media activism may play a role in youths' level of trust in institutions. Further, when youth gain an awareness of structural inequities on social media, they may encounter misinformation and disinformation, making it more difficult to accurately recognize structural inequities or take positive sociopolitical action (Rocha et al., 2021 ). In a study with immigrant youth (Wilf et al., 2022 ), young people felt that their social change efforts on social media, particularly their efforts to educate themselves and their peers, were hampered by misinformation. In Tunisia, adult activists reported that misinformation and trolling online could “sabotage” their organizing efforts (Etter &amp; Albu, 2021 ). However, adults may be more likely to participate in a protest if they are exposed to misinformation online (Boulianne &amp; Lee, 2022 ). Further research is needed to understand how misinformation can impact young people's organizing work. Emerging research shows that social media can contribute to youth burnout when engaging in online social movements. Burnout is a critical topic in organizing and activism, as all social movements experience high attrition rates (Conner et al., 2023 ). A study with youth activists in the United States (Conner et al., 2023 ) and another with climate activists in India (Wilf et al., 2024 ) found that youth were exposed to bullying and harassment on social media related to their activism, which could increase youth burnout and detract from their level of engagement. Exposure to negative content on social media could be even more harmful for youth organizers holding marginalized identities. For instance, Tanksley and Hunter ( 2024 ) interviewed young Black racial justice activists to explore their experiences with racially traumatizing digital content. They found that their participants experienced a broad range of negative health outcomes, including anxiety and depression, in response to viral images of Black people being killed online. Research is needed with young organizers to understand how social media may contribute to, or exacerbate, their burnout. Finally, research shows that social media use can lead to young people becoming disillusioned with what they view as performative activism online. In several studies, youth report ambivalence about the effectiveness of social media on social action and sustainable change (Anderson et al., 2018 ), and report that many of their peers engage in activism online primarily to win others' approval (Abdalla et al., 2022 ). Research is needed to understand how young activists view performative activism online and how it may shape their online sociopolitical engagement. Despite social media being an essential domain for youth development and political participation, it is understudied in the SPD literature (Bañales et al., 2020 ; Diemer et al., 2017 ). The unique social, environmental, and political context of the dual pandemics in 2020 further complicates this knowledge gap. This paper aims to illuminate adolescent‐age youths' lived experiences and meaning‐making of the socio‐historical moment. In doing so, we might better understand how adolescents navigated this unique period, which is foundational to understanding how these experiences affected their development. PRESENT STUDY In‐depth, qualitative research is needed to understand how the dual pandemics of COVID‐19 and structural racism during a unique sociopolitical moment may have shaped young people's SPD. This study offers concrete insights into how young people used social media to navigate the dual pandemics and how, in turn, social media use may have affected their critical consciousness and orientation toward sociopolitical action. In doing so, it advances the literature by highlighting social media's complex and sometimes ambivalent role in both fostering and hindering youth SPD, as social media sites have become a concentrated space for learning, dialogue, and action. It is particularly critical to center racially and gender‐marginalized youth in this research, based on the pandemic's disproportionate impacts on these communities and the surge in racial violence and racial justice‐focused social movements during this period. This analysis was also prompted by participant‐researchers in a Youth Participatory Action Research (YPAR) project. The youth interviewed in this study were part of a larger YPAR project that examined the relationship between social media and youth SPD, which took place in 2021. When analyzing their data, they asserted the need for a focused analysis of the relationship between social media, SPD, and the dual pandemics at such a formative time in their lives. The youth in the YPAR project gave permission for their data and previous analyses to be used by the two authors of this study, but they were not directly involved in the analysis for this paper. As such, the guiding research question is: How did social media influence youth SPD in the context of the dual pandemics of COVID‐19 and racism in 2020? By focusing on youth organizers from these communities who were engaged in activism during the dual pandemics, this study extends existing research on youth SPD online, providing a nuanced understanding of how social media served as a tool for critical consciousness‐raising, political engagement, and collective action in a significant sociopolitical moment. METHODS Design For this paper, two university researchers analyzed interview data collected for a YPAR project. The original study included (1) theoretical work on what youth sociopolitical development is based on youth experience and lived knowledge, (2) a photovoice project looking at the ambivalent relationship between social media and youth sociopolitical development (their conceptual model), and (3) supplementary interviews conducted by the first author and facilitator of the YPAR project to help contextualize and triangulate the data collected and analyzed by the youth researchers. This paper is a thematic analysis of semi‐structured interviews with 11 adolescent youth organizers (for demographic information, see Table 1 ). In this study, “youth organizing” is defined broadly to encompass both institutional and non‐institutional collective efforts by youth to drive sociopolitical change, regardless of whether these efforts occur within an organization or an organizing space. The interviews occurred within a larger YPAR study on the relationship between social media and youth sociopolitical development. As a supplemental process to the YPAR study, each young person participated in two interviews, 1 year after the onset of the COVID‐19 pandemic and the 2020 Black Lives Matter uprisings. The first author prompted these interviews to get more contextual information about the youth co‐researchers' experiences and triangulate data that the youth collected in the photovoice project. The first round of interviews took place between June 28, 2021, and July 2, 2021. The semi‐structured protocol focused on learning about young people's identities, self‐perceptions, social values, political attitudes, and aspects of their online and offline ecosystems that influence their sociopolitical development. Issues related to the dual pandemics emerged organically in these interviews for all the youth. The second round of interviews took place from July 26 to July 30, 2021. The semi‐structured protocol focused on learning more about how the COVID‐19 pandemic affected their experiences with SPD and what role social media played in their sociopolitical action over the past 2 years. The interview guide can be found in Appendix A . All interviews were conducted via Zoom and took about 1 h to complete. Recruitment This project used a snowball sampling approach. To recruit for the original YPAR study, the first author circulated an electronic flyer to youth in greater Seattle and South Puget Sound, Washington, USA. The flyer invited youth aged 13–19 who were interested in learning about social media's role in youth organizing to fill out an online application. The application asked youth to self‐report basic demographic information, describe their experience with civic or community engagement, and discuss the social justice issues that were important to them and why they wanted to participate in the study. The flyer was sent to various youth development and youth empowerment programs, local youth advisory councils, school counselors, student‐run clubs, and youth‐led community organizations through social media direct messages. Once three youth researchers were enrolled, they were invited to recruit other adolescents to apply. This study was IRB‐reviewed and approved. To participate, all youth under the age of 18 completed written assent and guardian consent. Youth over the age of 18 completed written consent. Verbal consent was obtained from the youth at each point of data collection. The original YPAR project from which these interviews were conducted aimed to enroll around 10 participants, which has been suggested as a group size that facilitates meaningful engagement in the research process (Malorni et al., 2022 ). Ultimately, 12 youth enrolled, but one left the project before the interview phase due to unavailability. Sample Demographic information was collected as part of the original YPAR study. Youth completed an adapted version of the Social Identity Wheel and Spectrum Activity Questions (Equitable Teaching, n.d.; see Appendix B ). The responses were uploaded into REDCap, a secure web application. The adolescents who participated in the project were diverse in age, organizing experience, race, ethnicity, home language, gender, and socioeconomic status. Youth were ages 14–19, with a M age of 16.3. Genders included cis women ( n = 5), transmasc ( n = 1), gender fluid ( n = 1), non‐binary ( n = 2), and cis men ( n = 2). One‐third of the youth were gender diverse. Youths' racial and ethnic identities are reported in their own words in Table 1 . First languages included English, Spanish, Cantonese, Somali, and Vietnamese. Five youth came from middle‐class families, and six identified as coming from working‐class or poor families. Three youth lived with a disability or were identified as disabled. Two youths were not sure how they identified sexually. Two identified as gay, or MLM, which stands for men‐loving‐men and is inclusive of monosexual and polysexual relationships. One youth chose not to respond, and two youths were straight. The remainder identified as lesbian, fluid, bisexual, and asexual. Youth were highly engaged online, with the average reported hours per day on social media ranging from 3 to 9 h, averaging 4.5 h. Three‐quarters of youth posted social media content more than once per week. During recruitment, all youth self‐reported a high interest in issues of racial and social justice and self‐identified as being sociopolitically active in their communities; however, during the first interview it became clear that the extent of their experience being sociopolitically active varied. All but one youth were involved in at least one social or community organization (online or offline). The first author indicated that six youth were “highly” sociopolitically active, meaning they participated in multiple organizations or organizing campaigns at least once per week over the past 6 months. These youth could give specific examples of their involvement in planning and attending political actions. Two young people were considered “somewhat” active, meaning they were members of sociopolitical organizations, but their involvement was irregular and/or infrequent over the past 6 months. These youth had significantly less experience planning political action, but were able to provide specific examples of attending actions or supporting online campaigns. Three youth were not actively involved in political action at the time of the study, but were able to demonstrate specific examples of being “somewhat” active in the past. Three of them were members of sociopolitical organizations but had not been engaging with those organizations in the past 6 months. Youth were involved in school‐based and community organizations around climate justice, racial injustice, police abolition, gun violence, housing justice, human trafficking prevention, feminism, Black liberation, trans liberation, reproductive justice, education, Free Palestine, and stopping anti‐Asian hate. Sociopolitical actions included advising public officials, creating and managing social media‐based action campaigns, door‐knocking for political issues, building coalitions, leading organizer trainings, creating petitions, attending meetings, participating on youth advisory boards for political organizations, creating educational materials, organizing marches/protests, and attending marches/protests. To protect the identity of the youth participants, pseudonyms are used, and specific demographic data is not linked to each person. The pseudonyms and pronouns are as follows: Rory (they/them), Alina (she/her), Nico (he/him), Jia (she/her), Yarah (she/her), Lara (she/her), Indigo (they/them), Abe (he/him), Liliana (she/her), Skylar (they/them), and Jimena (she/her). Analysis The process of thematic analysis involved several steps: familiarization, coding, theme generation, and reviewing and defining themes (Braun &amp; Clarke, 2006 , 2012 ; Terry et al., 2017 ). First, we familiarized ourselves with the transcripts, looking at the scope and scale of the youth perspective. After familiarization, we completed the first round of coding. Using a line‐by‐line approach, we applied the conceptual framework of youth SPD that was constructed by the YPAR researchers themselves (Malorni et al., 2024 ). Youth perspectives about the intersection of social media, racism or anti‐racism, and the COVID‐19 pandemic were coded into cognitive, behavioral, emotional, and relational domains. Then, we conducted second‐order coding within each domain using a line‐by‐line in vivo approach (Corbin &amp; Strauss, 2015 ). This round of coding was inductive. The two authors created 118 unique codes across the four domains. Codes were sometimes organized within more than one domain when appropriate. For example, the code “doing more research because of media bias,” which referred to increased concern about media bias during the pandemic, was listed under both the cognitive and behavioral domains. Next, the two authors met to identify and name sub‐themes within and across each domain. Each author independently organized codes into sub‐themes (e.g., “centering racial justice in more spheres of organizing”) and then met to resolve any discrepancies in interpretation. Positionality, triangulation, and trustworthiness The first author did the primary data collection. Her positionality, or social location, affected the study's design, data analysis, and manuscript writing. At the time of data collection and analysis, she was a 32‐year‐old researcher working at a large public university. However, she has facilitated participatory research with youth in local community‐based organizations for more than 10 years. One of the young people in this project had previously participated in a youth‐adult organizing project she facilitated. This enhanced the trust, familiarity, and communication she had with some youth. Additionally, she spent 2 months building relationships and trust with the youth researchers before collecting any data. While she has been a community organizer since she was a teenager, she is an outsider in almost every other regard. Her identities as white, cisgender, older, and having a Ph.D. all affected power dynamics within the YPAR collective. For example, multiple times, youth expressed wanting to make sure they “gave [her] what [she was] looking for” in their data collection and analysis. When this occurred, the first author talked with them about the goals of participatory research and the importance of their lived knowledge and expertise. For the interviews used in this study, the first author conducted thorough member checking during and after data collection and used coding methods that preserved participants' exact wording. The interview data were triangulated with multiple other data sources that were collected for a more extensive participatory study of social media and youth sociopolitical development. This included screenshots of social media activity and interaction, written reflections on social media screenshots, and two collaborative analysis meetings that were audio‐recorded and transcribed. Contradictions within the youths' data were identified by the first author and resolved through unstructured dialogue in one‐on‐one meetings. Contradictions across youth data were presented as topic points to discuss in the analysis phase of the YPAR project. Member checking on the interpretation of interview data was completed after the two interviews were conducted. The youth in the broader YPAR study on social media and youth SPD also categorized their insights into cognitive, behavioral, emotional, and relational domains; thus, there was some overlap in the member checking of those excerpts. However, there was no additional member checking after the two authors of this manuscript coded the interview data. RESULTS The dual pandemics and racial justice uprisings of 2020 affected adolescents in ways that uniquely shaped their sociopolitical development. As technology became increasingly central to daily life, relationships, and learning, social media played a crucial role in these shifts. Six key themes or perceived changes were identified. The first three relate to shifts in critical reflection and youths' development of agency through collective identity formation on social media. The remaining three relate to social media use and the dual pandemics' influence on youth critical sociopolitical action. Shifts in critical reflection and agency Due to social media use throughout the dual pandemics, the youth emphasized three fundamental shifts in their learning, beliefs, and sense of sociopolitical identity. These included an intensification of sociopolitical learning, changes in beliefs and attitudes about U.S. sociopolitical institutions, and an increased sense of collective identity and agency to take collective action. Intensification of sociopolitical learning All of the youth said that the increased time on social media, in combination with less in‐person engagement, intensified sociopolitical learning, particularly around racial justice and analysis of other structural inequities. They noted that not being in school freed up time and attention for learning more about their social and political worlds, and the prevalence of seeing content about racial justice movements shared by their peers increased their motivation to learn. Skylar attributed this to the unique opportunity that the dual pandemic presented in their life. It provides me with a lot more time to do more research on things, and formulate more in‐depth and nuanced opinions. Because I think I had really strong political opinions before the pandemic, but I kind of just looked…not necessarily looked at things from a surface level… but I just had the opinions that a lot of other people have. And I didn't really take a second to look and think. For Alina, the dual pandemics fundamentally shaped her vision of social justice. I feel like my idea of social justice is racially based right now, especially because of COVID, anti‐Asian hate, and Black Lives Matter. And so my social justice is a world where we can freely state our religion, race, and ethnicity, without having to worry about others reactions other than 'oh that's cool' or 'oh hey me too' or something like that. Increased social media use during a time of crisis and unrest deepened their connection and understanding of complex issues. Jia explained that she felt “ immersed” in social issues in a way she had not previously. With the pandemic, you were more immersed in online platforms and social media. And I really came to learn more about social justice, and what that means, beyond the mainstream politics of today, with the killing of George Floyd and the protests that came with it. As Yarah, a person of color, explained, “Also empathy I think empathy has grown. I know for me and for a lot of other people during COVID, learning about people's stories [on social media], learning about all the social justice issues that have been going on.” They went on to explain that people's online education during COVID‐19, particularly about racism, was a launching point: COVID has definitely made racism go a lot higher… the percentages have gotten a lot worse than what it was, maybe like two years ago. But it's also helped people become more aware. I've talked to people were like 'I did not know that this was racism that POC people were dealing with.' Rory, who is White, highlighted that social media facilitated deeper learning about White supremacy culture as they watched racism play out in the media representation of the BLM uprisings and the nation's COVID‐19 response. They described a post they came across: “I saw a post that was like ‘White supremacy culture in everyday life.’” The phrase was attached to images and headlines about racial inequities playing out in real time. “I was like ‘Whoa. This is really [does mind‐blown motion with hands/face]’… so and I learned a lot through social media.” Lara, a person of color, had a similar experience, but added that social media helped her build a language for engaging around complex ideas. Furthermore, she also learned new sociopolitical concepts and histories. Before COVID, I understood a lot of these things, but I didn't have a name for them. I didn't have abolition, communism, radicalism, or mutual aid in my vocabulary up until COVID. It's really interesting because Instagram will save all the stories that I posted in the archive so sometimes I look through my archives to see the change in how and what I posted changed. Because I've always posted about social justice, ever since I had Instagram, but I didn't start posting revolutionary abolitionist stuff up until [year 2020]. Lara reflected that the repetition of seeing more transformational content online during the dual pandemics shifted her own way of thinking. In looking back over her archived posts, she noticed, “I didn't post a lot of ‘we need to tear it down’ up until COVID. Because when COVID hit that's what everyone was saying, they were like ‘we can't have this system anymore, we have to abolish it.” All of the youth talked about using social media to seek out news or critical perspectives on current events in a new way during the dual pandemics. A few youth also used social media to learn more about the histories of social issues and social movements for the first time. For example, Indigo shared that issues of racial and social justice have “always been important [but] they became a lot more important to me when the riots started.” They said they felt added pressure to self‐educate during the pandemic. They explained, “ People's true colors were shown when we were all locked up and talking to each other, because we talk to each other a lot more. So you got to know people.” They said that the dual pandemic years “impacted me a lot personally. Because those are what started me wanting to surround myself with better people and educate myself a lot more.” Lara theorized that social media use during the dual pandemics made it harder to ignore social injustice, but also that youth were restless from social distancing and needed a place to put their energy. I think being in a pandemic and forcing people to stay at home and watch what was going on, instead of ignoring it, like what usually happens to Ferguson, and all the calls before… But I think that's why the numbers were so intense worldwide when George Floyd was murdered, and when Breonna Taylor was murdered and when Ahmaud Arbery was murdered. Because people had to watch and people couldn't ignore it anymore. And it wasn't because they couldn't stand it, but because they were quarantined during a global pandemic and they were bored which is super heartbreaking. But I think social media was used a lot more and numbers in terms of people rallying in the streets were greater because people were stuck inside. Alina was new to organizing and learning about social justice issues. Through daily and repetitive exposure to content, she organically learned more about racial and social justice. Most of my classmates and friends post a lot about social media and social events like George Floyd. That's how I usually learn of it because so many people are just on to it that day. People who see their stories who make it a regular thing to see their stories just learn more about it naturally because it's just a daily routine to post and read. She explained that seeing the same perspectives about BLM “regularly” from people she trusts helps her internalize the information more and builds her trust in the content. I feel like when you see it often enough. So like during [BLM and COVID] events, I look at what that social account is and if I feel like it's trustworthy, I guess I believe it. But also it's because, how many people are reposting and reposting and replying and giving more information or more elaboration in different posts. So, for example, if I see this one post on my story, And I press on it, and I see this information about like 'yada yada yada', for example, and then I go to the next story, and I see more elaboration like 'yada yada yada' 'detail detail detail' I believe it more. Additionally, multiple youth talked about how the COVID‐19 shutdowns afforded them more space to absorb and process the abundance of information they were reading. Abe explained that with more time on his hands, he had more quiet space to let what he was reading sink in. Changes in beliefs and attitudes about U.S. sociopolitical institutions The youth felt that social media use during the dual pandemics affected their perspectives on U.S. criminal justice institutions, policing, and belief in mainstream political institutions. Three of the youth expressed that they already had low trust in political and legal institutions as agents for social justice before the pandemic started. However, three additional youth organizers expressed that the dual pandemics decreased their belief in and support of these institutions. Alina, new to activism, said she came across “ more and more posts being created about the legal system and how it's corrupt.” She reflected: I feel like there's not a lot of faith in police… so that's why there are a lot of protests because we felt like we have to do it not and we didn't trust the legal system or the police to actually do it.Before COVID, I thought the police were dependable… but I have like seen some posts about how Black Lives Matter started, and how it started because of policeman, and I'm not sure what that hashtag is, but police racism and how it was [trails off]. It didn't make me lose faith in the police, but it made me, be a bit more wary of the police, especially because of what happened that caused the creation of Black Lives Matter. Rory reflected on the dual pandemics, It showed me that the government can be dumb sometimes, but [I] kind of already knew that. And I already knew that healthcare was awful and that everything impacts people disproportionately. But I think COVID hammered that home. But I think the main thing is not COVID it was more so, the free time and the reliance on social media that did all the sociopolitical development. Abe, a very experienced organizer, had previously worked within and outside political institutions. He served on local politicians' youth leadership boards and even managed some of their social media accounts. However, he explained that the dual pandemics shifted his perspective. He shared, “I think it radicalized me more, so maybe move farther left and think about very macro‐level stuff.” He further explained, The protests in Seattle's demands to defund the police was a foreign concept to me. When I started to learn more about defunding the police I got to learn more about abolition, then I got to learn more about the prison system, and then it related to and I got to learn how that relates to the immigration system, it relates to our economy, it relates to the fundamentals of the founding documents and whatever. And it just kind of spiraled. In reflecting on his decreased trust in legal and criminal justice systems, he explained, And I think the big thing was that the defunding the police is so much different from other calls after Black Lives Matter uprisings, because it directly says ‘there's no use of police’ or at least there's a faction of defund that says ‘there's no use for police’ and that challenges the macro level of our institutions, much more than anything that was widely talked about in 2019. The things talked about pre COVID were like Bernie or Joe Biden, or what kind of reforms to the police, or how do we achieve a green new deal. And then post COVID it turned more into like ‘oh shit, America was set up to exploit!’ Increased sense of collective identity The youth in this study used different terms to express the concept of collective identity and a sense of agency to take collective action. One concept that several youth expressed was how a sense of “togetherness,” gained by witnessing collective action on social media, propelled youth's confidence in the ability of organized groups of people to create positive societal change. For example, Yarah explained: Social media is a big factor in making social change because that's where people are… and where people of all different backgrounds come from… and they'll know what to do within their community or other communities. And obviously stronger together is a big thing that I also believe in. As Yarah's quote highlights, a recurring theme was a sense that social media could foster connections and community in groups of youth with shared marginalized identities. Through social media, youth can find others to relate to and who can validate their experiences. Alina explained, “ For Asian experiences, like those relatable ones, you find that relatable and then you feel… I don't know kind of relieved· that you're not the only one that experiences things.” In this way, social media fostered a sense of togetherness for youth with other members of their racial or ethnic communities and validated their experiences. Youth explained that seeing protests happening globally through social media empowered their organizing work. Rory noted, I think everyone can agree that social media was a really big factor in the protests. I think if we hadn't been able to hear about what other places in the country were doing, then we wouldn't have been so galvanized. Further, the youth emphasized that seeing allies join protests for their racial or ethnic group was particularly powerful in fostering a sense of collective identity. Lara described the confidence they felt when they witnessed a protest for Asian Americans garnering support from non‐Asian American allies on social media: A bunch of my Asian friends organized a protest and all the people in all other protests group showed up. Like this indigenous group, this Black group. It was really awesome because it's really rare for, at least in my experience, to see Asian American issues get that type of platform through a whole protest and have other communities show up. So even seeing that from afar through social media, was super awesome. And that made me feel super like 'oh my gosh, all of our issues are intertwined' and it's not just me who sees that. Similarly, Liliana described how their mother became emotional when witnessing other people of color turn out to support Black Lives Matter protests in the spring of 2020: I would say there's no other, better word that I could think of other than togetherness. My mom keeps on saying like 'seeing all these allies and people of color just makes me feel some sort of way' since she's really emotional about these types of things. I was just there looking at it like 'Was this what it was like in the original movement back when it was Rosa Parks, Malcolm X ?' It felt nice. For these youth, seeing their community's issues recognized through protest and amplified through social media fostered a sense of “togetherness ” and a feeling of increased capacity for collective action. Shifts in critical sociopolitical action The youth emphasized three key shifts to critical sociopolitical action due to social media use during the dual pandemics. These included shifting to more horizontal and extra‐institutional organizing approaches, a pendulum swing in critical action, and an increased focus on racial justice in all spheres of organizing, paired with battling performativity. Shift toward extra‐institutional organizing strategies In line with the decrease in trust in traditional sociopolitical institutions discussed above, youth organizers noted that social media during the dual pandemics served as a tool for youth to engage in less conventional forms of critical action and imagine alternative systems for society. Jia reflected that, “ With the pandemic and you were more immersed in online platforms…That's when I really started to immerse myself in a lot of the organizing spaces that I'm a part of.” Alina felt that social media was an important balance to local mainstream news channels that painted the protests negatively. Through posts, she could directly see what was unfolding through live streams and peer's photos and see “ how our community is actually is protesting and striving to make a change or their world.” Yarah felt that having more access to diverse sources of information was important for expanding her thinking and encouraged her to develop more nuanced ideas for taking action. The youth reported that their overall activist strategy shifted toward more horizontal and extra‐institutional strategies like digital organizing and mutual aid. Digital organizing uses digital technologies to engage in political or social conflict to initiate, resource, and grow collective action (Selander &amp; Jarvenpaa, 2016 ; Young et al., 2019 ). Mutual aid is an organizing model in which people collaborate to exchange resources and services to overcome social, economic, and political barriers while fighting against the systems that created those barriers (Shepard &amp; Burghardt, 2015 ; Spade, 2020 ). While some youth were already partial to these strategies, all youth noticed an acceleration of these trends. Lara, Jimena, and Abe saw a rise in the visibility of mutual aid work, and that influenced one person's thinking about alternative ways of caring for their communities. Lara shared, Seeing…all the people being able to live in peace and mutual aid books, with their little pop‐up and, all these co‐ops, food, different hygiene products, whatever necessity you could think of was there. Just seeing that space be there was exactly how I imagined the world post‐revolution. Referring to mutual aid and other forms of direct action organizing, Jimena discussed how the COVID‐19 lockdowns pushed her to think more deeply about her political strategies and mobilizing tactics as an organizer. She said that social media was an important part of her growth during the summer of 2020 because I had to learn how to mobilize people in an online setting, and so I used a lot of social media to make sure that people get information and try to make sure to reach the maximum amount of people through social media and seeing how that would work and everything. And transitioning all the connections I had to online spaces, like Zoom and everything. So everything was a little bit different, and then I had to see how different political systems work, because I wasn't too aware of that. And so COVID helped me learn all of these different political processes online, and also how to mobilize people online. Some youth could see the positive impacts of these strategies in new ways. For example, Abe explained that COVID‐19 injustices, combined with more time on social media amid lockdowns, prompted many organizing groups to move their operations online, gaining new members: [COVID] has made it [my organizing work] more focused on mutual aid. It has made it, so I have to discern between the black lives summer 2020 of George Floyd's murder and then COVID. So specifically COVID, yeah more mutual aid focus, more social media, less in person stuff…I think COVID, the fact that it's moved to social media so much has helped grow groups but I think social media and the COVID and making it has actually helped grow groups. That said, he observed fast growth, but that did not always translate into sustained organizing work. He observed that groups that already had an in‐person presence before the onset of the dual pandemics but shifted their focus to digital organizing and mutual aid efforts “ have done a lot of on‐the‐ground work that actually is the thing that helps people.” A pendulum swing in critical action Many youth experienced a ‘pendulum effect’ of swinging from significant increases in their activism to being too burned out to engage within just a few months in 2020. The short time span between the onset of COVID‐19, the spike in anti‐Asian violence, and the May 2020 Black Lives Matter protests, combined with the additional time many youth had not been in school, catalyzed youth into digital and in‐person action. Yarah explained, I think that COVID definitely impacted my activism. Like I think that spark. I see a lot of people after that really changed and I've seen people that I didn't think were even going to go near the idea of human rights and politics be a true activist and going to protests. Liliana added that social media provided space for that “spark” to grow: “Without COVID I feel as though the social media portion of the BLM movement wouldn't be as progressed, as it was back in May, I think, of 2020. Yeah I think that's a good thing.” Witnessing injustices during COVID‐19, particularly anti‐Asian racism, galvanized youth into joining other social justice causes, like the movement for Black Lives in the spring of 2020. However, such an increase in activism, combined with the stress of the dual pandemics, contributed to burnout. All of the youth acknowledged that the BLM uprisings in the summer of 2020 sparked a wave of new energy at first. However, over a relatively short period of time, more than half of the youth began to feel emotionally and psychologically taxed trying to navigate COVID‐19 risk and loss, stressful protest environments, and traumatic content online. Lara described how the burst of activity propelled her to take to the streets, but then she found herself consistently in environments that felt challenging for her mental health and physical safety. When protests first started, I went every day. I think the only time that I took a break was after two weeks because I had to go to work. So it wasn't really a break at all. Also that's just when the protests were at their peak, so like tear gas every day, cops pushing people every day, cops arresting people every day. So it was just like, we're trying to be in this high‐strung violent environment. The stress of activism in a violent environment compounded the ongoing stress of the COVID‐19 pandemic. Subsequently, she needed to take complete “breaks” where she paused all sociopolitical action. In total, seven of the youth said that they felt their activism wane out of exhaustion, and in some cases, they also felt more pessimistic about the effectiveness of their efforts over time. Alina expanded on what this looked like for her. So I would slide up and engage and it just was not going anywhere. And I would live stream on my page and they would comment, a lot of really gross racist things and after a couple weeks, I was burnt out from protesting, burnt out from trying to talk to people on social media as well, people I used to call my friends… and I was like 'okay I sent you the resources, you are looking at them, but you're not understanding anything that they're saying. that's just fully your fault'. And I tried to do the work. Skylar shared similar sentiments and saw their peers struggling with sustained action as well. I think at the beginning, during last summer, a lot of people were like 'oh yeah, I'm going to learn more and I'm going to be more engaged'. And I saw something on Instagram [a statistic] that said that now support for Black Lives Matter and things like that has actually decreased from before 2020 summer. Which is just kind of insane. Jimena said that the ongoing dual pandemics felt overwhelming and that she saw many of her peers feeling overtaxed and needing to use social media as an “escape from the world:” There was this big movement, but then as time went on, the movement kind of started to die down. And so, a lot of people started engaging less through social media and began using social media as an escape from the world. So they use it as liking pictures and funny videos and going back to what it used to be, rather than as a tool to promote mutual aid events and Community events and all of these sort of things that we were doing through the Black Lives Matter movement and just this huge social media in general. In this way, social media both provided new opportunities for youth to take critical action, but also exacerbated pandemic stress by increasing youths' exposure to potential violence and racism, whether experienced in person or online. This led to youth feeling overwhelmed and unable to sustain sociopolitical activity. Centering racial justice and battling performativity In the wake of the Black Lives Matter protests of 2020, youth observed increased attention to issues of racial justice in their organizing. Before 2020, Rory was focused on climate activism for several years before the onset of the dual pandemics, but explained that racial justice hadn't been featured in their efforts. They explained that “ everything [organizing] kind of went on pause [due to COVID],” but shortly after, the 2020 BLM uprisings began. During the BLM protests, they described social media as a space to learn about the intersections of racial justice and other issues, like police violence, and to debate with others. They observed that organizing “restarted with the racial justice and just kept going from there, so I think every organizing sphere got racial justice in it.” They talked about how the vibrancy of anti‐racist organizing, combined with the decreasing effectiveness of school climate strikes when school was online, pushed their local organization to focus on the intersection of race and climate. This, in turn, impacted their self‐reflection and consciousness. They talked about how the shift to focusing on the intersection between racism and climate change boosted community engagement in their organizing. “They're like let's stop what we're doing and take a bit to just learn about racism and environmental racism and that intersection. And that's still like a major part of everything I do.” This also “increased [their] climate justice and racial awareness. ” All youth spoke to this theme to some degree. With increased attention to racial justice issues, Alina, Jia, Liliana, Skylar, and Jimena felt that issues of performative activism on social media were exacerbated. Performative activism is a label used to describe shallow or self‐serving support of a social justice cause. Liliana, Skylar, and Jimena all felt that identity alone and statements of support were being conflated with actions of solidarity. As Liliana said, So many influencers say the same thing. It'd be a little TikTok video, and then the subtitle will be like BLM and then like a bunch of like tan skin, dark skin, light skin like fists going up. Like, how does this correlate to [the BLM movement]? Concerns about performativity were not just about assessing others' actions; some also worried about how others would perceive them. For example, Liliana transitioned from middle to high school about 5 months into the COVID‐19 pandemic and 2 months into the 2020 BLM uprisings. Building relationships was difficult, affecting her confidence in getting and staying involved in sociopolitical action. She said this was amplified by the fact that she was primarily represented through her online identities and, perhaps more importantly, how others perceived her online based on phenotypical and vernacular traits. She experienced significant anxiety trying to communicate with people on sociopolitical issues, due in part to her worry about being perceived as “performative” and not invested in BLM issues, despite being Afro‐Latina and White. When the BLM movement started it was like should I participate or not. Would they think that I'm just full‐on white? would they think that just cuz I straighten my hair, I shouldn't be allowed to be a part of this movement? And I don't know. I didn't really have that much of an inclusive experience with BLM…because I've always been really light skin and I haven't really had that big Afro‐Latina gene. She said she feared people would think she was “[trying] to get included in this popular movement, just because she wants attention.” Five youth shared that they felt tension as they tried to increase attention to racial justice in their personal and community organizing work. Part of this tension seemed to be balancing their own motivations and desire to do good, with anxiety about how their actions are interpreted by others. Skylar explained, I think there is that pressure to make sure that you look perfect online and everything. I think that a lot of the time that's why, at least last year, there's a lot of people that were starting to post a lot on social media their political opinions. Which was really cool seeing people getting more politically engaged and stuff, but I think a lot of the times people were just sharing opinions just because it was a trend. Youth expressed that they struggled to navigate this tension privately and publicly. DISCUSSION Eleven racial‐ and gender‐marginalized youth organizers critically reflected on the intersection of social media, the dual pandemics, and SPD. This study sheds light on how young people navigated a crisis to deepen critical consciousness and inform their sociopolitical action. It also illuminated some of the struggles and challenges that youth activists face coming into the 2020s so that we might reflect on how to strengthen intergenerational movements and expand how we think about civic engagement with youth and transition‐age adults in the 2020s. The young people in this study had varying levels of experience organizing before the onset of the COVID‐19 pandemic. Still, all reported significant shifts in SPD with insights that extend knowledge in prior literature (e.g., Dunn et al., 2022 ). Youth highlighted how social media put a spotlight on structural inequalities by making content about structural racism more prevalent and routine in their daily lives. Additionally, social media offered an opportunity for youth to link their personal experiences with collective experiences of racism, which allowed them to better understand the magnitude of racial injustice in the United States and see their personal struggles within a sociopolitical context. Youth organizers reflected that they had more time and space to slow down and reflect on what was unfolding in society. As a result of the COVID‐19 pandemic closures, youth relied more on extra‐institutional places of learning, like social media. The social media landscape was flooded with content about racial and social injustice, and youth seemed more motivated to learn about racial and social justice from their peer networks. These findings align with prior literature documenting youths' efforts to educate themselves and others on social media, particularly during 2020 (Wilf et al., 2023 ; Quiles et al., 2023 ). However, this theme is an important addition to the youth organizing literature, which has extensively emphasized the role of in‐school experiences in politicizing marginalized youth and providing early opportunities for advocating for racial and social justice (Anyiwo et al., 2020 ). Scholars have emphasized the role of civics and social justice courses in schools to increase critical awareness, analysis, and commitment to social change (Anyiwo et al., 2020 ; Hope &amp; Jagers, 2014 ; Seider et al., 2020 ), but the youth in this project felt like they were free from having to expend their energy focusing on the school curriculum, and this opened up time for them to learn more about the history of social problems, social movements, and theories on community change from social networks. Social media also provided less structured opportunities for youth to dialogue, debate, and engage in peer education about sociopolitical topics, in line with emerging research with young adults (Maker Castro et al., 2024 ). There are likely benefits and limitations to both approaches to sociopolitical education, particularly with concerns for rampant misinformation on social media, and more research is needed on how SPD is affected by having adult‐designed social justice learning versus peer‐influenced content and dialogue. As a result of decreased trust in sociopolitical institutions, youth saw their organizing strategies shifting. They placed more emphasis on digital organizing and were prompted to seek out less conventional forms of action (e.g., working with/within political parties and large national organizations). They moved from more centralized ways of caring for community needs to community‐based and horizontal approaches like mutual aid. Although prior scholarship has examined how youth used social media to educate themselves during 2020 (e.g., Quiles‐Kwock et al., 2024 ), this study examines specific changes to youths' sociopolitical views. It explores how their decreased faith in institutions affected their online and offline organizing. This study also adds clarity on why more young adults may be engaging less in electoral politics, especially in the 2024 presidential election (Booth et al., 2023 ; BIFYA, 2024 ). Youth felt that social media use during the dual pandemics strengthened their collective identity and sense of agency to take collective action. They talked about simultaneously being more selective about who they surround themselves with, but also an increased sense of “togetherness” with those communities. They explained that the tension and pressure of the dual pandemics prompted them to want to build their communities more around sociopolitical values and that social media provided an opportunity to do this. By bonding more with others who shared support for social justice in the dual pandemics, youth reported feeling more connectedness, confidence, and increased opportunity for mobilization. This aligns with existing research on how social media facilitates frequent access to social support and opportunities for relationships that may not have otherwise been possible (Nesi et al., 2018 ). Collective identity building is essential for mobilization and overcoming psychological obstacles to participating in social or political movements (Gerbaudo, 2024 ; Klandermans, 2002 ; Whittier, 2017 ). The insights from the interviews with youth about social media during the dual pandemics are in conversation with popular sociological theories that social media has shifted peoples' sense of collective identity and collective action to a more anachronistic “connective action” in which diverse individuals take action to address shared social problems without any collective identity framing, organizational resource mobilization, or leadership (Bennett &amp; Segerberg, 2013 ). For the youth in this study, social media played a role in helping them see their experiences as part of a social collective in meaningful ways. Future research is needed to unpack this dynamic more. For example, a study might explore how the unique context of the COVID‐19 pandemic and the high visibility of structural racism in popular media shape collective versus connective identity formation in digital organizing. Another important effect of social media use in the dual pandemics for the youth in this study was a pendulum swing from intense activity to disengagement. The youth talked about how being at home witnessing what was unfolding around them on social media kept them out of their COVID‐19 “bubbles” and opened up opportunities for more online and offline opportunities for critical action. However, increased opportunity for action, when youth were also experiencing the stress of the dual pandemics, brought feelings of burnout. The youth were consistently exposed to stress. Just months into the dual pandemics, youth noted that they felt like they needed a break and that they saw others using social media more to escape stress rather than SPD. One year later, the youth felt that much of the organizing energy had already quieted. This aligns with prior literature showing that social media can have negative impacts on youths' mental health and their activism work (Tanksley &amp; Hunter, 2024 ). This study adds qualitative detail and youth voice to this dynamic during a community crisis. In addition to decreased trust in U.S. institutions discussed above, burnout may also be contributing to a decrease in youth civic engagement for youth aged 18–24 in the 2024 election. Finally, youth observed that racial justice was centered in their organizing in a more profound way during the dual pandemics of 2020. Youth believed that increased availability of critical social media content, paired with the socio‐cultural environment of the pandemic, led to a deeper understanding of how racial and social justice work needs to address structural forms of oppression, and for some, this led to decreased interest in trying to work within the existing social structures that exacerbate inequality in their organizing work. This insight is not surprising given that multiple studies over the past 20 years have suggested that racism, xenophobia, classism, and other forms of oppression construct barriers to conventional political participation and erode trust in institutionalized political systems (Calenda &amp; Meijer, 2009 ; Flanagan &amp; Levine, 2010 ). Increasingly, many racially and socially marginalized youth conceptualize their membership in cultural and ethnic organizations as a form of political action in and of itself (Ballard et al., 2020 ), including on social media (Wilf et al., 2024 ) and engage in more unconventional, popular, and grassroots strategies (Aldana et al., 2019 ; Hope et al., 2019 ). However, with a more popular adoption of an anti‐racist lens, youth also observed increased attention on critiquing performative activism. The concept of performative activism among youth is complex, particularly as the SPD literature has called for expansive definitions of critical action (Aldana et al., 2019 ; Anyiwo et al., 2020 ; Ballard et al., 2020 ; Flanagan &amp; Levine, 2010 ; Hope et al., 2019 ). The youth in this study illuminated the internal struggle of battling identity construction on social media and the fear of judgment from their peers for both action and inaction. Focusing more on racial justice was a “trend.” Still, it was also a necessary shift for individuals and organizations that were previously not intentionally addressing the intersection of racism and other social causes. Youth struggled to navigate this tension, which resulted in confusion and sometimes immobilization. The insights from this study can inform our efforts to build stronger intergenerational social movements, and support youth SPD across learning contexts. For example, digital literacy and critical media literacy training have been proposed as a tool for SPD with Black youth (Anyiwo et al., 2021 ). Further research might explore potential school‐based or out‐of‐school time curricula that integrate civics education and critical digital literacy to help youth navigate the stressors and challenges of social media, and develop skills for digital citizenship. Limitations There are several limitations to this study and its analytical approach. First, all youth self‐identified as sociopolitically active, and therefore, this study's findings may be more relevant for youth who are already politically engaged to some degree. Youths' activity varied, with some reporting a high frequency of time spent being politically active on social media and others less so. Regardless of the extent of their online activism, youths' experiences with social media during the dual pandemics likely differed from those of other youth who were not as politically engaged. Additionally, some youth were active before the dual pandemics and had a better point of reference for how their SPD had shifted, while others were still processing their sociopolitical identity and did not have a strong frame of reference for SPD or organizing. The use of snowball sampling also limits the extent to which these results can be generalized. Next, all youth were located within a generally progressive geographic mid‐sized region on the west coast. This region was one of the first cities to experience a COVID‐19 outbreak in the United States, had a relatively strong COVID‐19 response, and experienced a surge of activity during the Black Lives Matter uprisings of 2020. These factors are essential for understanding the context of youth experiencing dual pandemics in this region. With respect to the analytical approach, the overall study took place over 6 months, but this paper only draws from two points in time and is retrospective. Longitudinal data would clarify how SPD has truly shifted. However, the insights provided by this paper serve as a strong foundation for future research. Furthermore, these interviews demonstrated that longer‐lasting shifts in youth critical consciousness development were evident 1 year later. However, the lasting impact of this sociohistorical moment on youth organizing was unclear. The youth sustained some of the shifted thoughts and beliefs but noted that the shifts in their organizing had already declined significantly. Some cited burnout, and some labeled the increased action as performative. The shift away from larger political and organizing institutions and more toward community‐run horizontal organizations could play a part in the struggle with the longevity of mobilization as well. The fields of youth SPD and community organizing would benefit from further studies about how youth‐led social movements have shifted and a better understanding of how sustainable online organizing is. Finally, this data came from a YPAR project in which youth participants co‐authored publications elsewhere. Out of concern for confidentiality, this paper cannot link specific participants to direct identifiers (e.g., demographic information) or indirect identifiers (e.g., specific quotes that might reference ideas discussed in other publications). This limits our ability to examine change in SPD for individuals and leads us to organize our themes in the aggregate. For future studies, a disaggregated, longitudinal study would likely illuminate nuance and detail not captured here. CONCLUSION Adolescence is a powerful time for SPD, and the dual pandemics created a unique context for this process. Social media, already ubiquitous in daily social, emotional, and political life, became even more central to young people's lives. The youth organizers in this study critically examined social media's influence on SPD. They highlighted important shifts in critical consciousness and sociopolitical action, which may offer some explanations for how civic engagement and political participation are changing. Youth reported an intensification of sociopolitical learning, decreased trust in U.S. political institutions, and an increased sense of collective identity supporting their agency. Social media use contributed to a shift in youth organizing strategy to focus on digital organizing and mutual aid, a pendulum swing from high activity to burnout, and a centering of racial justice in all organizing spheres. The nuanced perspectives of youth in this study can inform social justice education with youth in the 2020s and help build stronger intergenerational movements for social change. FUNDING INFORMATION The data used in this paper was collected as part of a National Institute of Health, Translational Sciences, Training Grant (Award Number TL1 TR002318). CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT There are no conflicts of interest to report. CONSENT STATEMENT To participate, all youth under 18 completed written assent and one guardian consent. Youth over 18 completed written consent. All written consent was collected electronically using RedCap, as approved by the University of Washington IRB. Verbal consent from the youth was collected at each point of data collection. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This analysis was made possible by the work of the Youth Participatory Action Research (YPAR) collective, which included 12 adolescent organizers in the greater Seattle area. Their names are confidential, but the youth co‐researchers contributed to the research design, data collection, and analysis of a study on social media and youth sociopolitical development. This paper was a separate analysis of the data they collected, and the first author was influenced by their analyses. APPENDIX A. QUESTIONS FROM SEMI‐STRUCTURED INTERVIEW PROTOCOL How has COVID affected your social media use generally? How does your social media use compare with your social media use 6 months before COVID started? How has COVID affected your relationships? How has COVID affected the way you engage in dialogue with others about social issues? Has COVID impacted your social or political views? If so, how? What about the Black Lives Matter movements of the past year? How have those impacted your views or actions? How involved were you? What was that like? How did your involvement in activism in the past year compare/contrast with activism before COVID &amp; the pandemic? What role did social media play in the BLM movement of the past year? APPENDIX B. DEMOGRAPHIC DATA COLLECTION IDENTITY WHEEL ACTIVITY This survey is based on the Identity Wheel activity. It helps you reflect on your identities and helps me learn more about how you think of yourself. Please complete the survey below. Thank you! Our identities can be an important part of who we are. I want to learn more about how you think of yourself and your identities. Reflect on your identities, and list them below. Some examples of responses are provided, but answer these questions in whatever way feels right to you. Malorni, A. , &amp; Wilf, S. (2025). Unpacking social media's role in sociopolitical development amidst the dual pandemics: Perspectives of marginalized adolescent organizers. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 35, e70048. 10.1111/jora.70048 DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Data is available only on request due to privacy/ethical restrictions. REFERENCES Abdalla, A. , D'Souza, N. , Gill, R. , Jadavji, R. , &amp; Meneguzzi, C. (2022). Social media as a stage: A behind the scenes analysis of performative activism,“cancel culture,” and effective allyship. McMaster Undergraduate Journal of Social Psychology, 3(1), 83–122. Adler, R. , &amp; Goggin, J. (2005). What do we mean by “civic engagement”? Journal of Transformative Education, 3(3), 236–253. Aldana, A. , Bañales, J. , &amp; Richards‐Schuster, K. (2019). Youth anti‐racist engagement: Conceptualization, development, and validation of an anti‐racism action scale. Adolescent Research Review, 4(4), 369–381. Anderson, M. , Toor, S. , Rainie, L. , &amp; Smith, A. (2018). Activism in the social media age. Pew Research Center. Anyiwo, N. , Palmer, G. J. , Garrett, J. , Starck, J. G. , &amp; Hope, E. C. (2020). Racial and political resistance: An examination of the sociopolitical action of racially marginalized youth. Current Opinion in Psychology, 35, 86–91. Anyiwo, N. , Richards‐Schuster, K. , &amp; Jerald, M. C. (2021). Using critical media literacy and youth‐led research to promote the sociopolitical development of Black youth: Strategies from “Our Voices”. Applied Developmental Science, 25(3), 201–216. 10.1080/10888691.2021.1906246 Ballard, P. , Ni, X. , &amp; Brocato, N. (2020). Political engagement and wellbeing among diverse college students. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 71(3), 101209. 10.1016/j.appdev.2020.101209 Bañales, J. , Mathews, C. , Hayat, N. , Anyiwo, N. , &amp; Diemer, M. A. (2020). Latinx and Black young adults' pathways to civic/political engagement. Cultural Diversity &amp; Ethnic Minority Psychology, 26(2), 176–188. 10.1037/cdp0000271 Bennett, W. L. , &amp; Segerberg, A. (2013). The logic of connective action: Digital media and the personalization of contentious politics. Cambridge University Press. Berkeley Initiative for Young Americans . (n.d.). Risk generation . https://youngamericans.berkeley.edu/risk‐generation/ Bogan, E. , Adams‐Bass, V. N. , Francis, L. A. , Gaylord‐Harden, N. K. , Seaton, E. K. , Scott, J. C. , &amp; Williams, J. L. (2022). “Wearing a mask won't protect us from our history”: The impact of COVID‐19 on black children and families. Social Policy Report, 35(2), 1–33. Booth, R. B. , Medina, A. , Siegel‐Stechler, K. , &amp; Kiesa, A. (2023). Youth are interested in political action, but lack support and opportunities . Center for Information &amp; Research on Civic Learning and Engagement. https://circle.tufts.edu/latest‐research/youth‐are‐interested‐political‐action‐lack‐support‐and‐opportunities Boulianne, S. , &amp; Lee, S. (2022). Conspiracy beliefs, misinformation, social media platforms, and protest participation. Media and Communication, 10(4), 30–41. Braun, V. , &amp; Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3, 77–101. 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa Braun, V. , &amp; Clarke, V. (2012). Thematic analysis. In Cooper H., Camic P. M., Long D. L., Panter A. T., Rindskopf D., &amp; Sher K. J. (Eds.), APA handbook of research methods in psychology, 2. Research designs: Quantitative, qualitative, neuropsychological, and biological (pp. 57–71). American Psychological Association. 10.1037/13620-004 Bronfenbrenner, U. , &amp; Ceci, S. J. (1994). Nature‐nuture reconceptualized in developmental perspective: A bioecological model. Psychological Review, 101(4), 568–586. Calenda, D. , &amp; Meijer, A. (2009). Young people, the internet and political participation: Findings of a web survey in Italy, Spain and The Netherlands. Information, Communication &amp; Society, 12(6), 879–898. 10.1080/13691180802158508 Castro, E. M. , Wilf, S. , Guzman, J. G. , &amp; Wray‐Lake, L. (2024). ‘There's always opportunities to learn’: Immigrant‐origin youth's use and understanding of social media for civic education in the year 2020. Education, Citizenship and Social Justice, 1–19. 10.1177/17461979241259430 Center for Information &amp; Research on Civic Learning and Engagement (CIRCLE)/Tisch College 2020 Post‐Election Youth Survey . (2021). Young people created media to uplift their voices in 2020 . https://circle.tufts.edu/latest‐research/young‐people‐created‐media‐uplift‐their‐voices‐2020#:~:text=Meanwhile%2C%20youth%20ages%2018%2D19,creation%20of%20images%20and%20videos Choi, A. , D'Ignazio, C. , Foucault Welles, B. , &amp; Parker, A. G. (2023). Social media as a critical pedagogical tool: Examining the relationship between youths' online sociopolitical engagements and their critical consciousness. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1–25). Christens, B. D. , &amp; Peterson, N. A. (2012). The role of empowerment in youth development: A study of sociopolitical control as mediator of ecological systems' influence on developmental outcomes. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 41, 623–635. Christens, B. , Winn, L. , &amp; Duke, A. (2016). Empowerment and critical consciousness: A conceptual cross‐fertilization. Adolescent Research Review, 1(1), 15–27. Conner, J. O. , Greytak, E. , Evich, C. D. , &amp; Wray‐Lake, L. (2023). Burnout and belonging: How the costs and benefits of youth activism affect youth health and well‐being. Youth, 3(1), 127–145. 10.3390/youth3010009 Corbin, J. , &amp; Strauss, A. (2015). Basics of qualitative research, techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory (4th ed.) SAGE. Diemer, M. A. , &amp; Blustein, D. L. (2016). Critical consciousness and career development among urban youth. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 68, 220–232. 10.1016/j.jvb.2005.07.001 Diemer, M. A. , Rapa, L. J. , Park, C. J. , &amp; Perry, J. C. (2017). Development and validation of the critical consciousness scale. Youth &amp; Society, 49(4), 461–483. 10.1177/0044118X14538289 Diemer, M. A. , Rapa, L. J. , Voight, A. M. , &amp; McWhirter, E. H. (2016). Critical consciousness: A developmental approach to addressing marginalization and oppression. Child Development Perspectives, 10(4), 216–221. Drouin, M. , McDaniel, B. T. , Pater, J. , &amp; Toscos, T. (2020). How parents and their children used social media and technology at the beginning of the COVID‐19 pandemic and associations with anxiety. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 23(11), 727–736. 10.1089/cyber.2020.0284 Dunn, D. , Wray‐Lake, L. , &amp; Plummer, J. A. (2022). Youth are watching: Adolescents' sociopolitical development in the trump era. Child Development, 93(4), 1044–1060. Etter, M. , &amp; Albu, O. B. (2021). Activists in the dark: Social media algorithms and collective action in two social movement organizations. Organization, 28(1), 68–91. Fine, M. , Finesurrey, S. , Rodriguez, A. , Almonte, J. , Contreras, A. , &amp; Lam, A. (2021). “People are demanding justice”: Pandemics, protests, and remote learning through the eyes of immigrant youth of color. Journal of Adolescent Research, 36(5), 437–466. Flanagan, C. , &amp; Levine, P. (2010). Civic engagement and the transition to adulthood. The Future of Children, 20(159), 179. 10.1353/foc.0.00431 Freire, P. (2000). Pedagogy of the oppressed (30th anniversary ed.). Continuum. Gaby, S. (2017). The civic engagement gap(s): Youth participation and inequality from 1976 to 2009. Youth &amp; Society, 49(7), 923–946. 10.1177/0044118X16678155 Gee, K. A. , Asmundson, V. , &amp; Vang, T. (2023). Educational impacts of the COVID‐19 pandemic in the United States: Inequities by race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. Current Opinion in Psychology, 52, 101643. George Mwangi, C. A. , Bettencourt, G. M. , &amp; Malaney, V. K. (2018). Collegians creating (counter) space online: A critical discourse analysis of the I, too, Am social media movement. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 11(2), 146–163. Gerbaudo, P. (2024). From individual affectedness to collective identity: Personal testimony campaigns on social media and the logic of collection. New Media &amp; Society, 26(8), 4904–4921. 10.1177/14614448221128523 Geyton, T. A. , Town, M. , Hunte, R. , &amp; Johnson, N. (2023). Magnifying inequality: How Black women found safety in the midst of dual pandemics. Journal of Social Issues, 79(2), 716–734. Ginwright, S. A. (2005). On urban ground: Understanding African–American intergenerational partnerships in urban communities. Journal of Community Psychology, 33(1), 101–110. 10.1002/jcop.20045 Ginwright, S. A. (2007). Black youth activism and the role of critical social capital in Black community organizations. American Behavioral Scientist, 51(3), 403–418. 10.1177/0002764207306068 Godfrey, E. B. , Santos, C. E. , &amp; Burson, E. (2019). For better or for worse? System‐justifying beliefs in sixth‐grade predict trajectories of self‐esteem and behavior across early adolescence. Child Development, 90, 180–195. Heys, E. (2024). Generational values and political behavior . Berkeley Institute for Young Americans. https://youngamericans.berkeley.edu/wp‐content/uploads/2024/06/Executive‐Summary_Generational‐Values‐Political‐Behavior‐and‐Risk‐Perceptions.pdf Hope, E. C. , Anyiwo, N. , Palmer, G. J. , Bañales, J. , &amp; Smith, C. D. (2023). Sociopolitical development: A history and overview of a Black liberatory approach to youth development. American Psychologist, 78(4), 484–495. 10.1037/amp0001119 Hope, E. C. , &amp; Jagers, R. J. (2014). The role of sociopolitical attitudes and civic education in the civic engagement of Black youth. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 24(3), 460–470. 10.1111/jora.12117 Hope, E. C. , Pender, K. N. , &amp; Riddick, K. N. (2019). Development and validation of the Black community activism orientation scale. Journal of Black Psychology, 45(3), 185–214. 10.1177/0095798419865416 Jemal, A. (2017). Critical consciousness: A critique and critical analysis of the literature. Urban Review, 49, 602–626. Jemal, A. , &amp; Bussey, S. (2018). Transformative action: A theoretical framework for breaking new ground. E‐Journal of Public Affairs, 7(2). Jones, J. M. (2021). The dual pandemics of COVID‐19 and systemic racism: Navigating our path forward. School. Psychology, 36(5), 427–431. Karras, J. E. , Maker Castro, E. , &amp; Emuka, C. (2022). Examining the sociopolitical development of immigrant‐origin youth during a season of social unrest. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 32(3), 1042–1063. Kelly, L. L. (2018). A snapchat story: How Black girls develop strategies for critical resistance in school. Learning, Media and Technology, 43(4), 374–389. Klandermans, B. (2002). How group identification helps to overcome the dilemma of collective action. The American Behavioral Scientist, 45(5), 887–900. 10.1177/0002764202045005009 Lundberg, E. , &amp; Abdelzadeh, A. (2025). The role of youth extracurricular activities and political intentions in later political participation and civic engagement. Journal of Adolescence, 97(3), 662–674. 10.1002/jad.12443 Malorni, A. , Dolan, S. , Hong, A. , Joseph, N. , Mohamed, K. , Moore, L. , Phan, L. , Skoglund, I. , Too, I. , &amp; Wittman, S. (2024). Youth sociopolitical development: A conceptual framework by racial and gender minoritized youth organizers. American Journal of Community Psychology, 73(3–4), 473–489. 10.1002/ajcp.12729 Malorni, A. , Lea, C. H. , Richards‐Schuster, K. , &amp; Spencer, M. S. (2022). Facilitating youth participatory action research (YPAR): A scoping review of relational practice in U.S. Youth development &amp; out‐of‐school time projects. Children and Youth Services Review, 136, 106399. 10.1016/j.childyouth.2022.106399 Nash, A. , Kennedy, H. , Abraczinskas, M. , Ballonoff Suleiman, A. , &amp; Ozer, E. J. (2024). Examining the intersection of sociopolitical development and transformative social and emotional learning outcomes: An integrated approach in youth participatory action research. Youth, 4(2), 679–699. 10.3390/youth4020046 Nesi, J. , Choukas‐Bradley, S. , &amp; Prinstein, M. J. (2018). Transformation of adolescent peer relations in the social media context: Part 1—A theoretical framework and application to dyadic peer relationships. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 21(3), 267–294. 10.1007/s10567-018-0261-x PEW Research Center . (2021). The internet and the pandemic . https://www.pewresearch.org/wp‐content/uploads/sites/20/2021/09/PI_2021.09.01_COVID‐19‐and‐Tech_FINAL.pdf PEW Research Center . (2024). Americans' deepening mistrust of institutions . https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/trend/archive/fall‐2024/americans‐deepening‐mistrust‐of‐institutions Poteat, V. P. , Godfrey, E. B. , Brion‐Meisels, G. , &amp; Calzo, J. P. (2020). Development of youth advocacy and sociopolitical efficacy as dimensions of critical consciousness within gender‐sexuality alliances. Developmental Psychology, 56(6), 1207–1219. 10.1037/dev0000927 Quiles, T. B. , Hoyt, L. T. , Dotson, M. P. , Castro, E. M. , May, M. , &amp; Cohen, A. K. (2023). Who has to act? A qualitative exploration of emerging adults' critical consciousness during the COVID‐19 pandemic. American Journal of Community Psychology, 71(1–2), 136–146. Quiles‐Kwock, T. B. , Maker Castro, E. , Wilf, S. , Bryant, L. , Rudra, A. , Mathews, C. , &amp; Wray‐Lake, L. (2024). “Imagine growing up thinking the U.S. is the best opportunity”: Immigrant origin youth of color supporting the Black Lives Matter movement on Twitter. Journal of Adolescent Research, 1–39. 10.1177/07435584241256566 Rapa, L. J. , &amp; Godfrey, E. B. (Eds.). (2023). Critical consciousness (1st ed.). Cambridge University Press. Reynolds, R. , &amp; Mayweather, D. (2017). Recounting racism, resistance, and repression: Examining the experiences and# hashtag activism of college students with critical race theory and counternarratives. The Journal of Negro Education, 86(3), 283–304. Rocha, Y. M. , de Moura, G. A. , Desidério, G. A. , de Oliveira, C. H. , Lourenço, F. D. , &amp; de Figueiredo Nicolete, L. D. (2021). The impact of fake news on social media and its influence on health during the COVID‐19 pandemic: A systematic review. Journal of Public Health, 31(7), 1–10. Seider, S. , Kelly, L. , Clark, S. , Jennett, P. , El‐Amin, A. , Graves, D. , Soutter, M. , Malhotra, S. , &amp; Cabral, M. (2020). Fostering the sociopolitical development of African American and Latinx adolescents to analyze and challenge racial and economic inequality. Youth &amp; Society, 52(5), 756–794. 10.1177/0044118X18767783 Selander, L. , &amp; Jarvenpaa, S. L. (2016). Digital action repertoires and transforming a social movement organization. MIS Quarterly, 40(2), 331–352. 10.25300/MISQ/2016/40.2.03 Shepard, B. , &amp; Burghardt, S. (2015). Community projects as social activism: From direct action to direct services. SAGE Publications, Ltd. Sherrod, L. (2007). Approaches to positive youth development. In Silbereisen R. K. &amp; Lerner R. M. (Eds.), Approaches to positive youth development (pp. 59–74). SAGE Publications Ltd. 10.4135/9781446213803 Sherrod, L. R. (2015). Recognizing civic engagement as a critical domain of human development. Research in Human Development, 12(3–4), 312–318. 10.1080/15427609.2015.1068040 Silva, N. R. (2022). ‘Defund the police’: Strategy and struggle for racial justice in the US. In Social Movements and Politics During COVID‐19 (pp. 189–194). Bristol University Press. Spade, D. (2020). Solidarity not charity: Mutual aid for mobilization and survival. Social Text, 38(1), 131–151. 10.1215/01642472-7971139 Springtide . (2024). Low confidence in U.S. institutions—Especially political institutions—Among young people. Springtide Research Institute. https://springtideresearch.org/post/data‐drop/low‐confidence‐in‐institutions‐especially‐political?srsltid=AfmBOorz06szpA9MC6RIrPdHr‐tfvdD6h03ISIAPqPbpMQ7EAXMM3JYX Stop AAPI Hate . (2023). Righting wrongs: How civil rights can protect Asian Americans and Pacific islanders against racism. Stop AAPI Hate. Stornaiuolo, A. , &amp; Thomas, E. E. (2017). Disrupting educational inequalities through youth digital activism. Review of Research in Education, 41(1), 337–357. Tanksley, T. , &amp; Hunter, A. (2024). Black youth, digital activism and racial battle fatigue: How black youth enact hope, humor and healing online. In Connor J. (Ed.), Handbook of youth activism (pp. 272–289). Edward Elgar Publishing. Terry, G. , Hayfield, N. , Clarke, V. , &amp; Braun, V. (2017). Thematic analysis. In The SAGE handbook of qualitative research in psychology (pp. 17–37). Sage Publications Ltd. Theron, L. C. , Cockcroft, K. , Annalakshmi, N. , Rodgers, J. G. , Akinduyo, T. E. , &amp; Fouché, A. (2023). Emerging adult resilience to the early stages of the COVID‐pandemic: A systematic scoping review. Child Psychiatry and Human Development, 56(3), 793–808. 10.1007/s10578-023-01585-y Toubøl, J. (2019). From democratic participation to civic resistance: The loss of institutional trust as an outcome of activism in the refugee solidarity movement. The British Journal of Sociology, 70(4), 1198–1224. Watts, R. J. , Diemer, M. A. , &amp; Voight, A. M. (2011). Critical consciousness: Current status and future directions. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 2011(134), 43–57. Watts, R. J. , &amp; Flanagan, C. (2007). Pushing the envelope on youth civic engagement: A developmental and liberation psychology perspective. Journal of Community Psychology, 35, 779–792. 10.1002/jcop.20178 Watts, R. J. , &amp; Guessous, O. (2006). Sociopolitical development: The missing link in research and policy on adolescents. In Ginwright S., Noguera P., &amp; Cammarota J. (Eds.), Beyond resistance! Youth activism and community change: New democratic possibilities for practice and policy for America's youth (pp. 59–80). Routledge. Watts, R. J. , Williams, N. C. , &amp; Jagers, R. J. (2003). Sociopolitical development. American Journal of Community Psychology, 31(1–2), 185–194. Wegemer, C. M. , &amp; von Keyserlingk, L. (2022). Dual pandemics of COVID‐19 and systemic racism: The roles of perceptions of inequities, civic values, and conservatism in mask‐wearing behavior. Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy, 22(1), 66–88. Whittier, N. (2017). Identity politics, consciousness‐raising, and visibility politics. In McCammon H. J., Taylor V., Reger J., … Einsohner R. L. (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of US women's social movement activism (pp. 376–397). Oxford University Press. Wilf, S. , Maker Castro, E. , Gupta, K. G. , &amp; Wray‐Lake, L. (2022). Shifting culture and minds: Immigrant‐origin youth building critical consciousness on social media. Youth &amp; Society, 55(8), 1589–1614. Wilf, S. , Rudra, A. , &amp; Wray‐Lake, L. (2024). “I will still fight for it till the end”: Factors that sustain and detract from Indian youths’ climate activism. Youth, 4(3), 1238–1259. Wilf, S. , &amp; Wray‐Lake, L. (2024). “That's how revolutions happen”: Psychopolitical resistance in youth's online civic engagement. Journal of Adolescent Research, 39(4), 827–860. Wilf, S. , Wray‐Lake, L. , &amp; Saavedra, J. A. (2023). Youth civic development amid the pandemic. Current Opinion in Psychology, 52(101627), 1–5. Yazdani, N. , Hoyt, L. T. , Maker Castro, E. , &amp; Cohen, A. K. (2022). Sociopolitical influences in early emerging adult college students' pandemic‐related civic engagement. Emerging Adulthood, 10(4), 1041–1047. Yeh, C. J. , Stanley, S. , Ramirez, C. A. , &amp; Borrero, N. E. (2022). Navigating the “dual pandemics”: The cumulative impact of the COVID‐19 pandemic and rise in awareness of racial injustices among high school students of color in urban schools. Urban Education, 59(8), 2365–2394. Young, A. , Selander, L. , &amp; Vaast, E. (2019). Digital organizing for social impact: Current insights and future research avenues on collective action, social movements, and digital technologies. Information and Organization, 29(3), 100257. 10.1016/j.infoandorg.2019.100257 Associated Data Data Availability Statement Data is available only on request due to privacy/ethical restrictions.