4597 pcnrep PCN Reports: Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences PCN Rep Wiley PMC11839490 11839490 11839490 39980859 10.1002/pcn5.70073 Association between maternal history of mental illness and neurodevelopment of children during the first 3 years: The Japan Environment and Children's Study Ohara Nobuki MD 1 Mitsuda Naomi MD, PhD 2 Yamasaki Keiko PhD 3 4 Eitoku Masamitsu PhD 3 4 Suganuma Narufumi MD, PhD 3 4 Komatsu Shizuka MD 1 5 Kazui Hiroaki MD, PhD 1 Takahashi Hidetoshi MD, PhD 1 5 ✉ and the Japan Environment and Children's Study 1 Department of Neuropsychiatry, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Nankoku‐shi, Japan 2 Department of Pediatrics, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Nankoku‐shi, Japan 3 Department of Environmental Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Nankoku‐shi, Japan 4 Center for Child Health and Environmental Medicine, Kochi University, Nankoku‐shi, Japan 5 Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Nankoku‐shi, Japan * Correspondence Hidetoshi Takahashi, MD, PhD, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Japan Kohasu, Oko‐cho, Nankoku‐shi, Kochi 783‐8505, Japan. Email: htakahashi@kochi-u.ac.jp ✉ Corresponding author. 19 2 2025 4 1 e70073 e70073 20 2 2025 © 2025 The Author(s). Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences Reports published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Japanese Society of Psychiatry and Neurology. This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. Abstract Aim The impact of maternal mental illness on children's neurodevelopment has been insufficiently investigated, particularly in large populations. In this study, we examined the association between maternal mental health history and child neurodevelopment during the first 3 years postpartum, using large‐scale data from the Japan Environment and Children's Study (JECS). Methods We analyzed data from 64,389 mother–offspring pairs enrolled in JECS. Maternal history of mental illness was assessed using questionnaires administered during early pregnancy. Child neurodevelopment was assessed at ages 1, 2, and 3 years by mothers or guardians using the Japanese version of the Ages and Stages Questionnaires, 3rd Edition (J‐ASQ‐3), across five domains. In this study, we employed multivariate logistic regression analysis. Results Children whose mothers have a history of mental illness exhibited significantly higher risks of developmental delays in gross motor skills and problem‐solving domains at age 1, and across all J‐ASQ‐3 domains at ages 2 and 3, compared to those whose mothers do not have such a history. Conclusion Our findings indicate that children born to mothers with a history of mental illness may exhibit early neurodevelopmental delays in gross motor skills and problem‐solving as early as age 1 year, potentially leading to broader neurodevelopmental impairments observed in later childhood. Additionally, childcare support aimed at enhancing neurodevelopment may be essential for mothers with a history of mental illness within the first year postpartum. Keywords: ages and stages questionnaires, child neurodevelopment, developmental delays, Japan environment and children's study, maternal mental health We examined the association between maternal mental health history and child neurodevelopment during the first 3 years postpartum using large‐scale longitudinal data from the Japan Environment and Children's Study. Children born to mothers with a history of mental illness may exhibit early neurodevelopmental delays in gross motor skills and problem‐solving as early as age 1 year, potentially leading to broader neurodevelopmental impairments as they grow older. status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Revised 2025 Jan 25; Received 2024 Sep 2; Accepted 2025 Feb 4; Collection date 2025 Mar. INTRODUCTION Perinatal mental illness, encompassing depression and anxiety disorders, is a prevalent complication during pregnancy, childbirth, and the postpartum period. 1 , 2 The 2023 edition of the Guidelines for Obstetrical Practice in Japan 3 recommends that information on past mental health disorders be obtained during the initial consultation and that the risk of developing depression and anxiety disorders during pregnancy be assessed. Several studies have explored the association between maternal perinatal mental health and children's neurodevelopmental outcomes. For example, one study has shown that maternal depression before childbirth is significantly associated with cognitive, linguistic, and motor developmental delays in children up to the age of 2 years. 4 Moreover, a longitudinal study from China found that maternal depression, anxiety, and stress during pregnancy and postpartum significantly affect early neurodevelopment in children at 6, 12, and 24 months of age. 5 However, little research has been conducted on the impact of maternal mental health before pregnancy on children's neurodevelopment. One study 6 examined the association between mental illness in mothers and the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders in children. Children born to mothers with schizophrenia or unipolar depression had a significantly higher risk of intellectual disability than the control group. This risk remained consistent regardless of whether the maternal illness was diagnosed before or after the child's birth (odds ratio 3.2 for schizophrenia, 2.9 for unipolar depression). Conversely, intellectual disability risk was significantly increased only when bipolar disorder was diagnosed before the child's birth (odds ratio 3.1). Additionally, children born to mothers with bipolar disorder had a significantly higher risk of autism spectrum disorder. However, details regarding whether the maternal illness was diagnosed before or after the child's birth were not provided for autism spectrum disorder. In addition to the impact of pre‐pregnancy maternal mental health on children's neurodevelopment, a few studies suggest that maternal mental illness before pregnancy influences children's emotional outcomes. A previous study showed that maternal depression before pregnancy affects children's emotional reactivity, regardless of maternal depression during or after pregnancy. 7 Another study revealed that higher maternal post‐traumatic stress disorder symptoms before pregnancy were associated with increased negative emotionality in children, and this relationship was not mediated by maternal depression during or after pregnancy. 8 To our knowledge, this topic has not been well studied in a large‐scale population, therefore we used data from a large study conducted in Japan to investigate how maternal psychiatric history influences children's early neurological development. The hypothesis of this study was that children born to mothers with a history of psychiatric disorders are more likely to show delays in certain areas of neurodevelopment at each age. Based on this hypothesis, we assessed the neurodevelopment of children aged 1, 2, and 3 years and analyzed the association with maternal psychiatric history. METHODS Study design We analyzed data from the Japan Environment and Children's Study (JECS), a birth cohort study. Pregnant women were recruited from 15 regional centers across the country between January 2011 and March 2014, with more than 100,000 participants enrolled in the JECS. JECS is a national initiative funded by the Japanese Ministry of the Environment. Detailed protocol and baseline data can be found in previous publications. 9 , 10 Participants In this study, we used the “jecs‐ta 20190930” dataset, released in October 2019 and revised in April 2020. The dataset comprised 104,062 fetal records. This dataset included data from the beginning of the study until the children were 3 years old. From these records, we excluded entries with missing data on live births, miscarriages, and stillbirths ( n = 2123) and cases of miscarriage or stillbirth ( n = 1636), resulting in a total of 100,303 live births. We further excluded records with missing ( n = 15) or indeterminate ( n = 3) offspring sex data. We also excluded cases with missing data from the Japanese Ages and Stages Questionnaires, 3rd edition (J‐ASQ‐3) 11 ( n = 35,896), specifically those lacking J‐ASQ‐3 data at any age between 1 and 3 years, or cases where the J‐ASQ‐3 was not assessed within the appropriate age range (1 year: between 10 months and 16 days and 14 months and 30 days; 2 years: between 22 months and 16 days and 26 months and 30 days; 3 years: between 34 months and 16 days and 38 months and 30 days). Consequently, we included 64,389 mother–offspring pairs in the analysis (Figure 1 ). Assessment Maternal history of mental illness During early pregnancy, JECS researchers administered a self‐reported questionnaire to the mothers. The questionnaire included items asking whether they had ever been diagnosed by a doctor with major mental illnesses, including depression, anxiety disorders (such as neurasthenia, phobias, panic disorder, social phobia, and obsessive‐compulsive disorder), or schizophrenia. Mothers who answered that they had ever been diagnosed with these major mental illnesses were categorized as the exposure group ( n = 3048) and those who did not have such diagnoses were categorized as the control group ( n = 61,341). Among 3048 pregnant women with a history of mental illness, 1372 had depression, 1162 had anxiety disorders, and 89 had schizophrenia. The study included 438 women with histories of both depression and anxiety disorders, 26 with both depression and schizophrenia, 22 with both anxiety disorders and schizophrenia, and 13 with all three conditions. In this study, we did not collect information on whether the participants were receiving ongoing psychiatric treatment at the time of data collection. Child neurodevelopment The neurodevelopment of children aged 1, 2, and 3 years was assessed using the J‐ASQ‐3, a parent‐completed screening tool designed to identify children at risk for developmental delays. J‐ASQ‐3 questionnaires were distributed to mothers or guardians as their children reached the specified age. The J‐ASQ‐3 comprises 30 items distributed across five domains: communication, gross motor skills, fine motor skills, problem‐solving, and personal‐social. Each item can be rated as “yes” (=10), “sometimes” (=5), or “not yet” (=0), yielding a total possible score of 0–60 for each domain. Validated cutoff scores of the J‐ASQ‐3 for each domain at 3 years of age are as follows: communication, 4.53, 14.33, and 29.95; gross motor skills, 9.43, 39.13, and 39.26; fine motor skills, 25.47, 33.48, and 27.91; problem‐solving, 15.37, 29.38, and 30.03; personal‐social, 4.95, 25.22, and 29.89. 11 If a questionnaire contained more than three unanswered items, the J‐ASQ‐3 score was not computed. If one or two questions were unanswered, the remaining items were totaled and adjusted by multiplying by 1.2 or 1.5, following the ASQ‐3 manual. 12 Statistical analysis We compared the characteristics of mothers and children in groups with a history of mental illness (exposed group) and without such a history (control group). This study independently investigated the impact of a history of maternal mental illness on child development at each age. In Table 1 , χ² tests were used for categorical variables (e.g., child's sex, maternal smoking habits) and independent samples t ‐tests were used for continuous variables (e.g., maternal age, paternal age). Similarly, in Table 2a , χ² tests were applied to compare the proportions of developmental delays, while independent samples t ‐tests were used to compare the differences between the groups at each age (Table 2b ). To investigate the relationship between maternal mental illness history and neurodevelopment in children up to age 3 years, we conducted multiple logistic regression analyses with covariates. The covariates in this study were child's sex, parental age and education, maternal smoking and drinking habits, and gestational age. These data were transcribed from medical record and obtained from maternal responses to questionnaires. The selection of these covariates was based on previous related studies. 4 , 13 , 14 All analyses were conducted using Stata/SE 18 (Stata Corp.) with a significance threshold of 0.05. RESULTS Table 1 presents the demographic characteristics of the mothers and children. Compared to the control group, mothers with a history of mental illness had shorter educational histories and higher rates of both current and historical smoking. Table 2a presents the proportion of children scoring below the screen‐positive threshold in each J‐ASQ‐3 domain at the age of 1, 2, and 3 years. At the age of 1 year, the children of mothers with a history of mental illness showed significantly higher rates of developmental delays compared to the control group, specifically in gross motor and problem‐solving domains. At the age of 2 years, these children showed significantly higher rates of developmental delays in all domains. This trend was also observed at the age of 3 years, when delays extended to all J‐ASQ‐3 domains, with a higher percentage of children below the screen‐positive threshold compared to the control group. Table 2b presents the mean scores (±standard deviation) of the J‐ASQ‐3 for the exposure and control groups in the developmental domains at the ages of 1, 2, and 3 years. At the age of 1 year, children of mothers with a history of mental illness had significantly lower scores in the gross motor and problem‐solving domains. At the age of 2 years, lower scores were observed in all domains compared to the control group, and this pattern intensified at the age of 3, with significant differences in all J‐ASQ‐3 domains between the two groups. Table 3 presents the association between maternal mental illness history and the risk of developmental delays in children up to 3 years old, as analyzed using multiple logistic regression. Children whose mothers have a history of mental illness exhibited significantly higher risks of developmental delays in gross motor skills and problem‐solving domains at age 1, and across all J‐ASQ‐3 domains at ages 2 and 3, compared to children of mothers without such a history. DISCUSSION This study demonstrates that children of mothers with a history of mental illness are significantly more likely to experience neurodevelopmental delays across various domains during the first 3 years of life. They demonstrated significantly higher risks of delays in gross motor skills and problem‐solving at age 1 year, and across all J‐ASQ‐3 domains at ages 2 and 3 years. This trend remained after adjusting for child gender, parental age at birth, parents' educational backgrounds, maternal smoking and drinking habits, and gestational age (weeks). These findings suggest that the impacts of maternal mental illness history on child neurodevelopment first emerge around age 1 year and persistently affect multiple domains beyond age 2 years. The J‐ASQ‐3 gross motor skills domain for 1‐year‐old children encompasses activities such as picking up objects, standing, squatting with support, walking with assistance using one or both hands, and standing up and walking independently. The development of these abilities indicates enhanced balance, muscle strength, and coordination. The J‐ASQ‐3 assessment of problem‐solving in 1‐year‐old children evaluates abilities such as locating a hidden toy and imitating actions, including placing toys into a bucket or box. These items evaluate a child's problem‐solving by assessing their imitation abilities, understanding of cause and effect, memory, and exploratory behavior. Our findings suggest that children of mothers with a history of mental illness are at a significantly increased risk for neurodevelopmental delays in various domains by the age of 1 year. Our findings align with previous studies reporting significant delays in motor and language development up to 24 months of age in children of mothers with perinatal depression. 4 Our findings align with previous research reporting significant reductions in gross motor skills among male infants at 6 and 12 months of age born to mothers experiencing high levels of depression and anxiety prenatally. 5 Significant decreases in problem‐solving were reported in female infants at 6 and 12 months of age whose mothers experienced high levels of depression and stress before childbirth. 5 These results are also consistent with our study, which observed delays in gross motor skills and problem‐solving at 1 year of age. However, while these previous studies primarily focused on the impact of maternal mental health during pregnancy on child development, this study investigates the influence of maternal history of mental illness during early pregnancy or before pregnancy, therefore direct comparisons are not possible due to differences in conditions. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, research directly comparable to this study on the relationship between maternal history of mental illness prior to pregnancy and child neurodevelopment is highly limited. This may be due to challenges in obtaining historical mental health information and determining causality. The mechanisms by which maternal mental illness affects child development are likely multifaceted. Genetic factors may play a significant role, as many mental illnesses, such as depression and schizophrenia, have heritable components. 15 Additionally, caregiving behaviors in mothers with a history of mental illness, such as reduced sensitivity or engagement, may directly affect child development. 16 , 17 Furthermore, it has been reported that low paternal involvement during infancy is associated with an increased risk of developmental delays in children, 18 highlighting the importance of both parents' roles in early caregiving. It is plausible that maternal mental illness prior to pregnancy influences maternal mental health during pregnancy, which in turn affects child neurodevelopment. Individuals with a history of mental disorders are known to have a higher risk of relapse under certain conditions. For example, in the case of depression, approximately 50% of patients experience a relapse after their initial episode, even after recovery, and the risk of recurrence increases with repeated relapses. 19 Similarly, schizophrenia often results in general functional decline 20 and reduced stress tolerance 21 after its onset. Moreover, individuals with a history of mental disorders are generally reported to have lower stress tolerance, and symptoms often recur due to stress. This may be influenced by neurobiological factors, genetic predisposition, and past experiences. 22 , 23 , 24 These intermediate factors may mediate the observed associations between pre‐pregnancy mental illness and child developmental outcomes. Future research should explore these temporal relationships through longitudinal studies that assess maternal mental health before, during, and after pregnancy. In Japan today, the primary infant health checkups are typically scheduled at 1.5 and 3 years of age. Our study has revealed that the impact of maternal mental illness on children is observable in some domains by age 1 year and in most domains by age 2 years. Therefore, for the early detection and intervention of neurodevelopmental delays in children of mothers with a history of mental illness, developmental assessments should be conducted within the first year after childbirth. Previous studies have shown that early interventions by healthcare providers during infancy can significantly improve cognitive development in children aged 0–36 months. 25 The American Academy of Pediatrics (2017) 26 also confirmed that primary care interventions from birth to the age of 3 years are essential for cognitive and social development. These findings highlight the importance of early intervention for neurodevelopmental outcomes. Our results indicated significant delays in gross motor skills and problem solving at the age of 1 year, thus these areas should receive special attention during early neurodevelopmental assessments. Identifying delays in these domains can facilitate timely intervention and support, which can improve long‐term neurodevelopmental outcomes. STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS The strengths of this study include its large‐scale prospective cohort design, which is relatively accurate and less prone to bias. However, this study has several potential limitations. First, selection bias may be present, as the participating pregnant women could represent a disproportionately health‐conscious group. For instance, only 0.18% of the participants self‐reported having schizophrenia, significantly lower than the general prevalence of approximately 0.3%. 27 Second, the diagnosis of mental illness often relies on self‐reporting, potentially leading to underreporting due to bias. Third, we did not use standardized diagnostic criteria, such as the 5th edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 28 to assess the maternal history of mental illness. Instead, the questionnaire used in this study included checkbox only for schizophrenia, depression, and anxiety disorders, as well as previous psychiatric history. Thus, other psychiatric disorders, such as bipolar disorder, were not accounted for, which limits the scope of the mental illness assessment. In this study, maternal mental health history refers to self‐reported diagnoses of mental illness. These diagnoses may occur either before or during early pregnancy. However, our dataset does not clarify whether the reported mental illness was limited to early pregnancy or a pre‐existing condition (in remission or ongoing during the perinatal period). This distinction is important because the specific timing and duration of maternal mental illness may influence its impact on children's neurodevelopment. Additionally, we cannot exclude the potential for selection bias due to loss to follow‐up. Excluded mothers may have experienced deteriorating conditions, preventing them from responding to questionnaires. Furthermore, we did not exclude participants who may have been exposed to volatile organic compounds or influenza infections during pregnancy, therefore we cannot rule out the possibility that these exposures may have contributed to delays in the children's neurological development. Finally, this study did not account for several important factors that could influence the children's neurodevelopment. For example, maternal mental health during pregnancy, caregiving environment (e.g., household stress, paternal involvement, and social support), and maternal neurodevelopmental conditions (e.g., autism spectrum disorder or attention‐deficit/hyperactivity disorder) were not evaluated. All the mothers who participated in this study were born before 2005, the year when the Act on Support for Persons with Developmental Disabilities was enacted. Consequently, these mothers possibly were not adequately assessed for neurodevelopmental conditions during childhood. Thus, this study might not have properly diagnosed or evaluated the maternal neurodevelopmental conditions. These factors may interact with maternal mental illness or independently affect neurodevelopmental outcomes. Thus, future research should incorporate these variables, especially neurodevelopmental conditions, to achieve a more comprehensive understanding of the factors that influence children's neurodevelopment. CONCLUSION Our findings indicate that children born to mothers with a history of mental illness may exhibit early delays in gross motor skills and problem‐solving as early as age 1 year. By ages 2 and 3 years, delays were observed across all neurodevelopmental domains. These observations highlight the need for further investigation, and both timely intervention and child care support may be essential for promoting neurodevelopment in children born to mothers with a history of mental illness, particularly within the first year postpartum. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Nobuki Ohara designed the study, performed data analyses, drafted the initial manuscript, and reviewed and revised the manuscript. Hidetoshi Takahashi assisted in study design, and reviewed and revised the manuscript. Naomi Mitsuda and Keiko Yamasaki assisted in data analysis, and reviewed and revised the manuscript. Masamitsu Eitoku, Narufumi Suganuma, Shizuka Komatsu, Hiroaki Kazui and the JECS Group reviewed and revised the manuscript. All authors approved the final manuscript as submitted and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work. CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors declare no conflicts of interest. ETHICS APPROVAL STATEMENT The JECS protocol was reviewed and approved the Ministry of the Environment's Institutional Review Board on Epidemiological Studies and the Ethics Committees of all participating institutions (Hokkaido University, Sapporo Medical University, Asahikawa Medical University, the Japanese Red Cross, Hokkaido College of Nursing, Tohoku University, Fukushima Medical University, Chiba University, Yokohama City University, University of Yamanashi, Shinshu University, University of Toyama, Nagoya City University, Kyoto University, Doshisha University, Osaka University, Osaka Medical Centre Research Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Hyogo College of Medicine, Tottori University, Kochi University, University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Kyushu University, Kumamoto University, University of Miyazaki, University of the Ryukyu). The JECS was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and relevant international regulations and guidelines. PATIENT CONSENT STATEMENT Written informed consent was obtained from all participants in the JECS. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION N/A. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the study participants and co‐operating health care providers for their support of the JECS. This study was funded by the Ministry of the Environment, Japan. The findings and conclusions of this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official views of the government. The Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry at Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, is funded by Kochi Prefecture, Japan. APPENDIX A. Members of the JECS Group as of 2024: Michihiro Kamijima (Principal Investigator, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan), Shin Yamazaki (National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Japan), Maki Fukami (National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan), Reiko Kishi (Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan), Chiharu Ota (Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan), Koichi Hashimoto (Fukushima Medical University, Fukushima, Japan), Chisato Mori (Chiba University, Chiba, Japan), Shuichi Ito (Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan), Ryoji Shinohara (University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Japan), Hidekuni Inadera (University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan), Takeo Nakayama (Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan), Ryo Kawasaki (Osaka University, Suita, Japan), Yasuhiro Takeshima (Hyogo Medical University, Nishinomiya, Japan), Seiji Kageyama (Tottori University, Yonago, Japan), Narufumi Suganuma (Kochi University, Nankoku, Japan), Shoichi Ohga (Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan), and Takahiko Katoh (Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan). Ohara N, Mitsuda N, Yamasaki K, Eitoku M, Suganuma N, Komatsu S, et al. Association between maternal history of mental illness and neurodevelopment of children during the first 3 years: the Japan Environment and Children's Study. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci Rep. 2025;4:e70073. 10.1002/pcn5.70073 DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Data are unsuitable for public deposition due to ethical restrictions and legal framework of Japan. It is prohibited by the Act on the Protection of Personal Information (Act No. 57 of 30 May 2003, amendment on 9 September 2015) to publicly deposit the data containing personal information. Ethical Guidelines for Medical and Health Research Involving Human Subjects enforced by the Japan Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare also restricts the open sharing of the epidemiologic data. All inquiries about access to data should be sent to jecs-en@nies.go.jp . The person responsible for handling enquiries sent to this e‐mail address is Dr Shoji F. Nakayama, JECS Programme Office, National Institute for Environmental Studies. REFERENCES 1. Howard LM, Molyneaux E, Dennis CL, Rochat T, Stein A, Milgrom J. Non‐psychotic mental disorders in the perinatal period. Lancet. 2014;384(9956):1775–1788. 2. McNab S, Fisher J, Honikman S, Muvhu L, Levine R, Chorwe‐Sungani G, et al. Comment: silent burden no more: a global call to action to prioritize perinatal mental health. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2022;22(1):308. 3. Japan Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Japan Association of Obstetricians and Gynecologists . CQ011: management of pregnant women with mental disorders and high‐risk pregnancies. In: Guidelines for obstetrical practice in Japan, 2023 Edition. Japan Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Japan Association of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; 2023. 4. Fan X, Wu N, Tu Y, Zang T, Bai J, Peng G, et al. Perinatal depression and infant and toddler neurodevelopment: a systematic review and meta‐analysis. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2024;159:105579. 5. Zhang T, Luo ZC, Ji Y, Chen Y, Ma R, Fan P, et al. The impact of maternal depression, anxiety, and stress on early neurodevelopment in boys and girls. J Affect Disord. 2023;321:74–82. 6. Morgan VA, Croft ML, Valuri GM, Zubrick SR, Bower C, McNeil TF, et al. Intellectual disability and other neuropsychiatric outcomes in high‐risk children of mothers with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and unipolar major depression. Br J Psychiatry. 2012;200(4):282–289. 7. Spry E, Moreno‐Betancur M, Becker D, Romaniuk H, Carlin JB, Molyneaux E, et al. Maternal mental health and infant emotional reactivity: a 20‐year two‐cohort study of preconception and perinatal exposures. Psychol Med. 2020;50(5):827–837. 8. Swales DA, Davis EP, Mahrer NE, Guardino CM, Shalowitz MU, Ramey SL, et al. Preconception maternal posttraumatic stress and child negative affectivity: prospectively evaluating the intergenerational impact of trauma. Dev Psychopathol. 2023;35(2):619–629. 9. Kawamoto T, Nitta H, Murata K, Toda E, Tsukamoto N, Hasegawa M, et al. Rationale and study design of the Japan environment and children's study (JECS). BMC Public Health. 2014;14:25. 10. Michikawa T, Nitta H, Nakayama SF, Yamazaki S, Isobe T, Tamura K, et al. Baseline profile of participants in the Japan environment and children's study (JECS). J Epidemiol. 2018;28(2):99–104. 11. Mezawa H, Aoki S, Nakayama SF, Nitta H, Ikeda N, Kato K, et al. Psychometric profile of the ages and stages questionnaires, Japanese translation. Pediatr Int. 2019;61(11):1086–1095. 12. Squires J, Bricker DD, Twombly E. ASQ‐3: user's guide. In: Paul H ed. Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing; 2009. 13. Rees S, Channon S, Waters CS. The impact of maternal prenatal and postnatal anxiety on children's emotional problems: a systematic review. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2019;28(2):257–280. 14. Mori M, Nishigori T, Ogata Y, Suzuki T, Sato A, Murata T, et al. Maternal prenatal psychological distress and motor/cognitive development in two‐year‐old offspring: the Japan environment and children's study. J Dev Orig Health Dis. 2023;14(3):389–401. 15. Serretti A, Fabbri C. Shared genetics among major psychiatric disorders. The Lancet. 2013;381(9875):1339–1341. 16. Goodman SH, Gotlib IH. Risk for psychopathology in the children of depressed mothers: a developmental model for understanding mechanisms of transmission. Psychol Rev. 1999;106(3):458–490. 17. Sell M, Radicke A, Adema B, Daubmann A, Kilian R, Stiawa M, et al. Parents with mental illness: parental coping behavior and its association with children's mental health. Front Psychiatry. 2021;12:737861. 18. Kato T, Fujii M, Kanatani K, Niwa F, Hirabayashi K, Nakayama T, et al. Paternal involvement in infant care and developmental milestone outcomes at age 3 years: the Japan Environment and Children's Study (JECS). Pediatr Res. 2024;95(3):785–791. 19. Moriarty AS, Meader N, Snell KIE, Riley RD, Paton LW, Dawson S, et al. Predicting relapse or recurrence of depression: systematic review of prognostic models. Br J Psychiatry. 2022;221(2):448–458. 20. Jones MT, Harvey PD. Major neuropsychological impairments in schizophrenia patients: clinical implications. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2020;22(11):59. 21. Schifani C, Tseng HH, Kenk M, Tagore A, Kiang M, Wilson AA, et al. Cortical stress regulation is disrupted in schizophrenia but not in clinical high risk for psychosis. Brain. 2018;141(7):2213–2224. 22. Kendler KS, Karkowski LM, Prescott CA. Causal relationship between stressful life events and the onset of major depression. Am J Psychiatry. 1999;156(6):837–841. 23. Caspi A, Sugden K, Moffitt TE, Taylor A, Craig IW, Harrington H, et al. Influence of life stress on depression: moderation by a polymorphism in the 5‐HTT gene. Science. 2003;301(5631):386–389. 24. Heim C, Newport DJ, Heit S, Graham YP, Wilcox M, Bonsall R, et al. Pituitary‐adrenal and autonomic responses to stress in women after sexual and physical abuse in childhood. JAMA. 2000;284(5):592–597. 25. Hirve R, Adams C, Kelly CB, McAullay D, Hurt L, Edmond KM, et al. Effect of early childhood development interventions delivered by healthcare providers to improve cognitive outcomes in children at 0‐36 months: a systematic review and meta‐analysis. Arch Dis Child. 2023;108(4):247–257. 26. Peacock‐Chambers E, Ivy K, Bair‐Merritt M. Primary care interventions for early childhood development: a systematic review. Pediatrics. 2017;140(6):e20171661. 27. World Health Organization . Schizophrenia . World Health Organization Official Website. 2022. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/schizophrenia 28. Association AP. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2013. Associated Data Data Availability Statement Data are unsuitable for public deposition due to ethical restrictions and legal framework of Japan. It is prohibited by the Act on the Protection of Personal Information (Act No. 57 of 30 May 2003, amendment on 9 September 2015) to publicly deposit the data containing personal information. Ethical Guidelines for Medical and Health Research Involving Human Subjects enforced by the Japan Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare also restricts the open sharing of the epidemiologic data. All inquiries about access to data should be sent to jecs-en@nies.go.jp . The person responsible for handling enquiries sent to this e‐mail address is Dr Shoji F. Nakayama, JECS Programme Office, National Institute for Environmental Studies.