3640 cnsneurosci CNS Neuroscience &amp; Therapeutics CNS Neurosci Ther Wiley PMC10915997 10915997 10915997 37305955 10.1111/cns.14266 Creative therapy in health and disease: Inner vision Khalil Radwa 1 ✉ Demarin Vida 2 1 School of Business, Social and Decision Sciences, Constructor University, Bremen, Germany 2 International Institute for Brain Health, Zagreb, Croatia * Correspondence , Radwa Khalil, School of Business, Social and Decision Sciences, Constructor University Bremen gGmbH Campus Ring 1, Bremen 28759, Germany. Email: rkhalil@constructor.university ✉ Corresponding author. 12 6 2023 30 3 e14266 e14266 6 3 2024 © 2023 The Authors. CNS Neuroscience &amp; Therapeutics published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd. This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Abstract Can we better understand the unique mechanisms of de novo abilities in light of our current knowledge of the psychological and neuroscientific literature on creativity? This review outlines the state‐of‐the‐art in the neuroscience of creativity and points out crucial aspects that still demand further exploration, such as brain plasticity. The progressive development of current neuroscience research on creativity presents a multitude of prospects and potentials for furnishing efficacious therapy in the context of health and illness. Therefore, we discuss directions for future studies, identifying a focus on pinpointing the neglected beneficial practices for creative therapy. We emphasize the neglected neuroscience perspective of creativity on health and disease and how creative therapy could offer limitless possibilities to improve our well‐being and give hope to patients with neurodegenerative diseases to compensate for their brain injuries and cognitive impairments by expressing their hidden creativity. Keywords: brain plasticity, creative therapy, de novo abilities, dementia, experience flow, kinesthetic creativity, musical creativity, visuospatial creativity Implementing an effective creative therapy in health and disease requires an investigation of brain plasticity in cognitive control, which may have varying effects on creativity domains such as musical, visuospatial, and kinesthetic creativity, based on the associated mental operations involved. status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Revised 2023 Apr 21; Received 2023 Feb 26; Accepted 2023 May 3; Collection date 2024 Mar. 1. INTRODUCTION Creativity makes invisible (novel and imaginative ideas) visible, and every individual possesses a level of creativity that varies in quality and degree. This creative act allows us to perceive the world differently, find hidden patterns, and construct connections between seemingly unrelated events to generate extraordinary output. 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 Following a summary of the fundamental theories on creativity conceptualization, we will discuss the various hypotheses that attempt to explain the mental processes involved in creativity. We shed light on the significance of skill development in enhancing creativity in health and disease. Therefore, we contend that brain plasticity associated with mental operations of creativity in various domains symbolizes the latent power of creative therapy in art, writing, music, and kinesthetic creativity (i.e., dance and sports). Through case studies, we demonstrate the ignored importance of creative therapy. As discussed by Rollo May in his book, The Courage to Create 5 , creativity brings to our awareness what has previously been hidden, opening new perspectives and visualizing what is invisible. Thus, the experience of enhanced consciousness is joyful. Fifty‐eight years ago, Ellis Paul Torrance began investigating creativity, especially in children. 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 He emphasized the role of the teacher and the significance of developing children's creative potential in the classroom. Robert Sternberg and his colleagues have also initiated considerable research on creativity assessment, who in 1991 established the Investment Theory of Creativity and Development. 10 , 11 The innate drivers for realizing one's unique potential explain the demand to be creatively identified as part of human self‐actualization within Maslow 's hierarchy of needs. 12 After more than 30 years of experimenting with creativity and individual differences, Csikszentmihalyi 13 , 14 stated that it is the notion of complexity that makes creative individuals' personalities distinct from others. According to Csikszentmihalyi , creative individuals show tendencies of thought and action that, in most individuals, are segregated, and these thoughts and actions feature contradictory extremes; instead of being “single,” they are “multitudinous.” One possibility to interpret this complex phenomenon of creativity and how it originated and expressed is to investigate the brain using the brain‐process and process‐brain approaches. Ned Herrmann developed his concept of the Whole‐Brain Thinking System (WBTS), 15 which includes four types of thinking, each roughly corresponding to one brain structure. This concept merges the left and right brain hemisphere theories with Paul MacLean 's triune theory 16 into a novel model of thinking styles. According to the WBTS concept, each person has a preferred thinking style, and others also have their preferred thinking styles; every person has a signature of his/her preferred thinking style(s). Four patterns in how the brain perceives and processes information led Herrmann to develop his concept. He constructed a measuring tool for observing these differences called the Herrmann Brain Dominance Instrument (Figure 1 ). Herrmann 15 explained his four specialized clusters of mental activity: A/Facts—Goals‐driven : logical, analytical, fact‐based, quantitative intelligence; B/Form—Results‐driven : structural–operational, sequential, organized, detailed planned intelligence; C/Feelings—People‐driven : social‐relational intelligence, interpersonal, feeling‐based, emotional intelligence; and D/Future—Vision‐driven : conceptual‐creative, intuitive, integrating, synthesizing intelligence. Therefore, creativity is personal; we should maintain our creative space at work and within the family and universally unleash our enormous creative capability. Another reason for the complexity of pinning down creativity stems from the fact that there are various creativity domains, including musical, literary, visual, kinesthetic, and scientific creativity. These domains are strongly interacting and intertwined, reflecting diverse views and opinions; for instance, creative architecture and designs represent a combination of both artistic and scientific creativity. 2 Also, there is a distinctive difference between art, science, and humor, 17 spontaneous and deliberate modes of creativity, 18 , 19 and problem‐solving and expression. 20 From the neuroscientific perspective, theoretical frameworks that posit brain‐based differences in artistic versus scientific creativity are scarce. 21 There is still considerable debate about these types of creativity and how best to conceptualize their commonalities and distinctions within a single viable framework. 2 Nonetheless, advancements in cognitive neuroscience concerning creativity offer additional promises to unravel this debate. The recapitulated purpose of cognitive neuroscience of creativity is to clarify how such a multitude of creative cognition could be mapped into specific features of brain regions (structural mapping) or specific activities within brain regions (functional mapping). 2 , 20 Though earlier times witnessed the mapping of functions to “locally separated brain regions,” the trajectory has today shifted toward “integrated activity of large‐scale, distributed networks of brain regions”. 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 The physiological approach to understanding creativity has a very long tradition, beginning in the 1940s when researchers examined the consequences—positive, negative, or unchanged—of prefrontal leucotomies, 26 , 27 a controversial procedure that involved severing the connections to and from the prefrontal cortex (PFC). The 1970s and 1980s witnessed the use of electroencephalography (EEG) to measure the type and pattern of brain activity exhibited during creative thinking. 28 , 29 , 30 Fast forward to the present day, and the latest trend in the physiological approach to understanding creativity is to characterize the mechanisms underlying creativity in the context of brain networks. 2 , 25 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 The range of paradigms, tasks, and techniques that have been used in the physiological approach has led to a diverse constellation of findings, and these have been used in different ways to explain the basis of creativity from the perspective of the nervous system. 2 , 20 , 37 , 38 , 39 The physiological approach to creativity has explored the relationship of creative engagement to the activity of the peripheral nervous system, such as enhanced sympathetic cardiac activity during divergent thinking (DT) 40 , 41 and increased pupil dilation during music‐induced aesthetic “chills”. 42 As most empirical investigations and theories concerning such physiological correlates of creative thinking are focused on the central nervous system and the brain in particular, these can fall into one of two categories: local and global. 2 Local explanations derive from specific physiological markers or indices to characterize how the brain facilitates particular mental operations relevant to creative thinking (e.g., analogical reasoning, conceptual expansion). Specificity is, therefore, the doctrine of local explanations regarding zoning in on the particular creativity‐relevant cognitive processes under study and the engagement of select brain regions or activity patterns. 31 , 43 However, the correlations between the mind's and nervous system's operations are far from linear. Global explanations regarding the physiological basis of creativity that center on the mechanisms of large and widely dispersed systems in the brain are referred to as “global”. This global explanation has two key common features: it typically draws on dualistic or triadic models of brain functions, and these functions map into large brain networks (e.g., the default mode network (DMN) and the central executive network (CEN)) or minimally differentiated large brain structures (e.g., the right versus left hemisphere). More recent models that propose global explanations of creative thinking have recognized the necessity of considering multiple factors when attempting to comprehend the neural basis of creativity. As a result, the concept of multiple‐factor models emerged to go beyond the dual models of creativity by considering the simultaneous operations of three (or more) systems that function in conjunction. The two multiple‐factor models that have been proposed to postulate the information processing mechanisms underlying (a) different aspects of the creative thinking process in general ( Jung's evolutionary brain networks perspective ) or (b) the many operations underlying different types of creative insight ( Dietrich's evolutionary predictive perspective ) are shown in Figure 2 . 2. CREATIVE MENTAL OPERATIONS The mental operations provide cognitive explanations for developing creative ideas and applying them in the frameworks of motivation, perception, learning, thinking, and communication. 44 The correlation between the brain process approach and the neuroscientific perspective is readily apparent, given that neuroscience is concerned with investigating the structure and function of the human nervous system. Despite the singular nature of the term “process,” it would be inaccurate to view the creative process as a singular or unified entity in any manner. The term in question serves as a concise descriptor for multifaceted arrays of cognitive, motivational, and emotional processes implicated in various mental activities such as perception, memory, imagination, appreciation, reasoning, strategizing, etc. 45 Several mental processes related to creativity have been studied psychologically, such as conceptual expansion, creative imagery, overcoming knowledge constraints, analogical reasoning, and metaphor processing. 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 Conquering the hindering influence of prominent information (overcoming knowledge constraints) for creating novel and useful ideas requires integrating basic abstract elements (creative imagery). This novel idea could be utilized in one domain to tackle problems in another (analogical reasoning) or gain a more profound conceptual comprehension of a specific phenomenon in diverse contexts (metaphor processing) 2 , 43 . Conceptual expansion is a major part of creative thinking; it means broadening our ideas or going beyond the limits of our existing conceptual frameworks of semantic information. The “aha” experience that accompanies solving analytical problems is also a part of creative mental operation (i.e., insight; for a review, see 50 ). All of us have encountered situations where we have reached an impasse and can not find a solution to a problem. At this moment, frustration arises, and a resolution suddenly emerges into an individual's awareness, apparently from an unknown source. A sudden realization or epiphany, colloquially known as an “eureka” moment or “aha” experience, is what marks the insight phenomenon. 50 This experience facilitates the expansion of pre‐existing conceptual knowledge structures to incorporate novel elements (i.e., conceptual expansion). The relevance of insight lies in its ability to emerge involuntarily upon reaching a solution, which is achieved by overcoming functional fixedness and engaging in a perspective shift. Therefore, these mental operations are cooperative and cannot be operated on or processed separately. Here, it is possible that the phenomenology of “surprise” is a factor to be considered among the previously mentioned elements of creative mental operations. In emphasizing that several mental (cognitive) operations are involved in creative thinking and not only one, which can be assessed by examining normative cognitive processes under explicitly generative conditions, this approach duly acknowledges the multifaceted nature of creativity. Therefore, the nature of the context in which creative idea generation is called for (the creativity task being employed and the mental operations involved during task engagement) cannot be disregarded. 51 For instance, the creative process of “conceptual integration” or “conceptual blending” is central to the poetics of literature, as this mental operation allows for the generation of novel meaning out of existing or old concepts and, as such, has a role to play in semantics, grammar, meaning, discourse, humor, poetry, and so on. 52 Clustering the mental operations of creative cognition often examined in isolation to reveal the information processes and the neural mechanisms underlying creativity, is one of the major challenges in creativity research. 2 , 18 , 19 , 20 Most conclusions are built on the basis that these diverse operations are mutually exclusive and do not interact; in fact, the opposite is the case. While engaging in creative pursuits in any domain of human endeavor, these diverse operations of creative cognition are orchestrated together and reflect the underlying integrated dynamic. 2 , 31 , 32 , 36 , 43 , 53 , 54 This dynamic interplay between both brain hemispheres through specific nodes (network hubs) 33 , 35 , 37 , 38 , 55 remodels the mental workspace, the deliberate and spontaneous modes, and the flow of experience. 18 , 56 , 57 , 58 In the subsequent sections, we will emphasize these underpinning dynamics. 2.1. Cross‐hemispheric communication The persistence of the creative right brain's concept has a strong resonance, especially considering that even the earliest advocates of lateralization research highlighted the significant role of both brain hemispheres in creativity. 59 , 60 , 61 The right hemisphere is specialized for metaphoric thinking, playfulness, solution‐finding, and synthesizing, and it is the center of visualization, imagination, and conceptualization; however, the left hemisphere is still required for artistic work to achieve balance, which partly suppresses the creative states of the right hemisphere. 4 Thus, drawing a simple inference about the nature of hemispheric differences (i.e., right vs. left) as a function of creativity is unfeasible. Instead, regions in both hemispheres are involved in creativity, even if the information processing about certain aspects of creative cognition may be biased regarding hemispheric lateralization. 62 , 63 , 64 This emphasis is evident among current opinions, 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 with many studies pointing to the necessity of considering individual differences in creativity further. 35 , 69 , 70 As an example, more creative individuals exhibit bilateral hemispheric activity; in contrast, less creative individuals show more right‐lateralized activity. 71 , 72 Brain imaging studies revealed that engaging in creative activities enhances hemispheric connectivity, and individuals with a larger corpus callosum tend to score higher on measures of creativity, which suggests that effective communication and integration of information between and within both brain hemispheres maybe crucial for creative thinking. 59 , 73 Indeed, when estimating differences in the structure of brain networks using Bayesian procedures, it has been shown that highly creative individuals demonstrate a higher tendency to form interhemispheric connections. 74 Recent evidence suggests that both hemispheres are essential in integrating information and thinking creatively, mainly when communicating, and that static and dynamic functional connectivity support the configuration of brain networks for creative cognition. 75 2.2. The dynamic interplay between the three distinctive creative network models Network theories of psychological functions are increasingly more dominant and influential than modular theories, which also apply to the neuroscience of creativity. 2 , 20 , 76 Unsurprisingly, during the creative process, there is a dynamic interplay of our unconscious and conscious processing that engages emotional systems and their associated neural circuits. 3 , 4 , 19 , 53 , 54 , 77 Empirical support for the involvement of various brain networks in creativity is primarily derived from neuroimaging studies. 20 , 25 , 33 , 35 , 78 , 79 , 80 These networks conceptualize creativity as the ability to activate remotely represented ideas and concepts. 81 In Mednick 's 82 flat associative hierarchy model, this activation process concerns the structural organization of long‐term semantic memory networks, which is the type of semantic retrieval wielded when accessing one's knowledge stores, as defined in Mendelsohn 's 83 defocused attention model and levels of trait cognitive disinhibition . Central to all these conceptualizations is the significance of loosened associational thinking , which is purportedly brought about by different information processing biases. 84 , 85 Given that the first two mechanisms— defocused attention and flat associative hierarchies —are focused on representation and access to conceptual knowledge, semantic cognition brain network regions would be implicated in information processing. Brain areas that underlie the representation of multimodal conceptual knowledge (anterior temporal lobe or temporal pole), the controlled retrieval of conceptual knowledge (ventrolateral PFC or inferior frontal gyrus), or both (posterior lateral middle temporal gyrus), would be especially relevant for these network models. 86 , 87 , 88 , 89 It has been argued that there are three most frequently used networks, 25 , 78 , 79 , 90 , 91 as shown in Figure 3 . The first network is CEN, which is activated when intensive attention and strong demands on working memory are required during creative thinking. 25 , 78 , 79 , 92 , 93 The CEN is established in the lateral regions of the PFC and other dorsal brain areas; it is also implicated in the disinhibition mechanisms; therefore, regions critical in orchestrating inhibitory processes fall within the frontostriatal tracts and include the basal ganglia and dorsolateral and ventrolateral aspects of the PFC. 94 , 95 , 96 , 97 , 98 The second network is the DMN (also called the imagination network and involved in social cognition, where the deep insula, PFC, and temporal lobe communicate with the parietal lobe). The DMN is primarily discussed in the context of reasoning about the perception, cognition, or behavior of one's self and others. 99 Nevertheless, there is no doubt that it also plays a role in non‐social and non‐personal components of imaginative thinking, such as future semantic thinking 51 and counterfactual reasoning. 100 For these reasons, its significance in mental processes related to intentionality‐based imagination and innovative combinatorial imagination has been indicated in constructing dynamic mental simulations about imagining alternative perspectives and scenarios. 25 , 78 , 101 , 102 , 103 The third network is the salience mode network (SMN), which constantly monitors both external and internal streams of consciousness; it is most salient for a particular task and is defined by two key nodes—the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the anterior insula. 33 , 78 , 79 , 80 , 92 The right anterior temporal lobe, which comprises portions of the superior and middle temporal gyri, is considered a crucial brain region in the context of insight, and it is classified as one of the fundamental regions of the SMN and DMN. 104 , 105 These three networks share commonalities regarding the kind of information processing biases related to creative expression. 34 , 35 , 68 , 80 , 106 However, CEN is involved in the closed, convergent, evaluative mode of creativity; in contrast, DMN is thought to be involved in the open, divergent, generative mode of creativity. 25 , 33 2.3. The mental workspace Deciding whether a particular product, event, concept, action, etc., is “creative” means performing an estimate in a specific knowledge space, so a definitive decision might still be uncertain. The mental tools for estimating the value of a new idea or product are subjective and vary across contexts. 2 Philosophers and scientists have long questioned where the human imagination comes from—what are the creative drivers behind the incredibly distinct behaviors of extraordinary scientists, artists, musicians, dancers, etc.? 2 , 3 , 4 Imagination is one of the ultimate operators to enhance our creativity; thus, nurturing the activation of imagination, particularly in nature, is crucial. Because nature is ever‐changing, it provides countless opportunities and directions for exploring and reconfiguring the mental space, 3 , 4 , 107 eventually boosting creativity. Numerous studies have emphasized the correlations between exposure to natural environments and cognitive benefits, physical health, and well‐being. 108 , 109 , 110 , 111 One potential mechanism for the benefit of spending time in nature is the perception of low‐level features of natural environments. 109 More precisely, the visual domain's edge density has been demonstrated to convey semantic information and influence executive functions (EFs, i.e., cognitive inhibition, attention, memory, planning, cognitive flexibility, etc.; for a review, see 112 ). According to White et al., 110 their study indicated that a minimum of 120 minutes per week spent in natural environments might serve as a crucial threshold for promoting health and well‐being among a diverse group of adults residing in England. However, additional investigations are demanded in this domain. The ability to consciously change mental images is at the heart of many creative and uniquely human skills. Here, the question arises about how the human brain mediates such flexible mental operations. An interesting study by the Dartmouth Center for Health Care Delivery Science 107 used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to quantify how humans manipulate mental imagery. This study used a widespread neural network—the brain's “mental workspace,” which deliberately operates images, symbols, ideas, and theories and gives humans the mental focus to solve complex problems and express novel ideas—to identify 11 brain areas that showed differential activity levels. In a follow‐up study by Schlegel et al., 63 they conducted a subsequent investigation that introduced innovative multivariate techniques for examining the transmission of information within the cognitive domain while performing visual imagery manipulation. This study concluded that generating mental imagery requires disseminating information across various cortical regions and establishing shared representations. 113 2.4. Emotion, cognition and flow: deliberate versus spontaneous modes Nineteen years ago, an influential account of different types of creativity argued for distinguishing between spontaneous and deliberate modes. 19 According to this view, there are four types of creativity with corresponding brain activities, which can either be emotionally or cognitively based and spontaneous (i.e., unexpected) or deliberate (i.e., a conscious effort to sustain), resulting in four quadrants, each with different and unique aspects. It is necessary to distinguish between laboratory and realistic creativity in different domains. Under laboratory conditions, it is clear that we mainly assess deliberate modes of creativity; in contrast, spontaneous forms of creativity are too transient and unpredictable to be tested validly or reliably in controlled laboratory settings. 2 , 20 , 114 Accordingly, we suggest that different kinds of creativity could be classified for each quadrant: either cognitive (scientific creativity) or emotional (musical, literary, visual artistic, and kinesthetic creativity), with a degree to which these types of creativity could change based on the switch between two modalities, within one modality, or both, as shown in Figure 4 . Establishing categorization and classification requires further investigation into employing various forms of creativity, focusing on the two modes and the cognitive and emotional elements. 3. BRAIN PLASTICITY AND CREATIVITY Despite the distinctiveness of the previous models and views in explaining the information‐processing mechanisms underpinning creativity, the underlying brain plasticity (particularly metaplasticity and synaptic plasticity) is underestimated. What creative neural plasticity is and how intrinsic and extrinsic drivers are mentally processed to promote optimal creative outputs are unknown. Thus, approaching the mental operations that underpin creativity from a plasticity perspective will allow us to scrutinize these fascinating capabilities and investigate how neurons construct specific and distinctive pathways that allow this high degree of adaptability. The term “brain plasticity” (also known as “neuroplasticity” or “cortical mapping”) refers to changes in the brain's neural pathways, which occur at the macroscopic, mesoscopic, or microscopic (synaptic) level and develop as a function of alterations in behavior (e.g., training‐induced), response to the environment (e.g., enriched, impoverished), and physiological processes (e.g., maturation, brain insults). 115 , 116 , 117 , 118 , 119 , 120 , 121 , 122 , 123 , 124 , 125 , 126 Brain plasticity opposes the idea that brain functions are fixed at a particular time 117 , 127 ; instead, it refers to the ability of the human brain to change as a result of one's experience that the human brain is “plastic” and “flexible”. 128 Musical training, improvisation, and exercises are among the most effective inducers of brain plasticity and lead to improved EFs (in the short and long term, based on durations and intensities). In musical improvisation, fMRI studies have shown motor and auditory cortex reorganization in professional musicians; other studies revealed changes in neurotransmitter and hormone serum levels in correlation to music (for an overview, see 2 , 129 ). There was also a corresponding decrease in frontal beta EEG brain activity # after one hour of running, and this pattern remained stable for the remaining 5 hours. 130 A reduction of beta waves following exercise is argued to constitute supportive evidence for the transient hypofrontality hypothesis of flow . 18 “Flow” refers to the state of absolute contentment accompanying the experience when it occurs, that is, the absence of a clear sense of time when having a “peak experience.” Therefore, flow is experienced when an individual's complete focus is engrossed in an activity that aligns with their skill levels and the requirements of the task at hand. 131 , 132 In this state, individuals do not experience negative emotions or fatigue despite exerting effort to maintain optimal performance. Accordingly, most research on flow experience is conducted in physical activities that involve moving the body, like sports, exercise, and dance. 133 The hypothesis of transient hypofrontality of flow is among the most prominent theoretical frameworks to explain flow experience, emphasizing the critical role of implicit and unconscious information processing and neural systems in facilitating the experience of flow, which is believed to occur due to a temporary weakening of cognitive control as orchestrated by the frontal lobe over other cognitive and neural systems. 18 , 56 , 134 , 135 , 136 The following subsections will discuss whether experience flow varies among creativity domains, the underlying plasticity, and the relationship between creativity, risk‐taking, mental illness, and substance abuse. 3.1. Musical, visuospatial and Kinesthetic creativity Philosophers, scholars, and scientists have long argued about the origin of the human imagination and the creative drivers behind the incredibly distinct behaviors of extraordinary scientists, artists, musicians, dancers, etc. 2 , 3 , 4 We know that the human brain has information‐processing networks that facilitate the functioning of a mental workspace, thereby enabling the manifestation of high‐order creative and cognitive abilities. So in what manner does the information flow within these networks facilitate mental operations of creativity, and are they the same across creativity domains? To address these questions, we discuss brain plasticity across three creativity domains. The power of music as an influential social bond in facilitating collective identity and a sense of community has been noted across diverse academic disciplines. 137 , 138 The apparent connection between music and enhanced performance or changes in neuropsychological activity has been demonstrated by studies involving Mozart's music, from which The Mozart Effect theory was derived. 3 , 4 , 139 In terms of music, the brain's plasticity in response to behavioral training in music 140 , 141 , 142 and biofeedback training 143 , 144 has been highlighted. Musicians from genres more typically associated with musical creativity, such as jazz, reveal a more comprehensive creative profile due to the power of improvisation in their practice. 145 In a study that compared the musical activities of classical, folk, and jazz music students, those studying jazz accomplished more creative achievements and exhibited a greater frequency of engaging in extracurricular musical activities. 146 Jazz musicians also exhibit greater openness to experience, a personality trait central to creativity, and better ideational originality in DT. 146 Musical training and improvisation induce brain plasticity, but could neurological alterations (such as brain injury) result in the emergence of musical skills? Brain images of individuals when they listen to music show activity in different brain parts 142 ; in particular, idiosyncrasies have been found in musicians' brain areas, including the motor cortex, the cerebellum, and the corpus callosum. Various other studies have indicated that listening to music can improve cognition, motor skills, and recovery after brain injury (for a review, see 3 , 129 ). Generative processes are held to be inherent to music performance, music composition, and musical improvisation. 147 , 148 , 149 However, the limited evidence that has examined whether playing music suffices to foster greater creativity has indicated that this is not necessarily the case. For example, only expert musicians who create music through composition or improvisation generate more creative uses for musical items; this differs from non‐musicians or expert musicians who do not create music. 150 On the other side of the coin are disorders of music perception. 151 , 152 , 153 A strong tendency toward musicality has been distinguished in atypical populations, such as those with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) 154 , which is to some extent counterintuitive, given that the primary deficit of ASDs is severe impairments in communication and social interaction (for a review, see 155 ). Therefore, there is growing evidence of the utility of music therapy in ASDs rehabilitation for improving verbal and non‐verbal communication skills and socio‐emotional reciprocity. 156 Nevertheless, the precise mechanisms underlying such interactions are unclear due to the intricate relations between richly intertwined and interconnected brain networks. Thereby, evaluating the nature of the relationship between music and brain plasticity in healthy and atypical individuals and its broader impact calls for considerable investigation since there are various pertinent issues to address. Studying blind artists has demonstrated the sharp power of the brain's plasticity in the context of the creation of visual art. At this juncture, extreme neural plasticity occurs, which refers to the capacity of the brain to continually reorganize itself as a function of experience by building new neural connections. 157 One fascinating case study showed the brain's ability to generate recognizable images of an object after exploring it through touch 158 and drawing, whereas the brain engages in visual processing regions, including the primary visual cortex (V1). 159 Even training a congenitally blind person to draw can result in a rapid cortical reorganization, as indicated by the novel recruitment of V1 (which, before training, displayed an undifferentiated response for a non‐visual task). 160 These remarkable examples shed light on the possibility of exploring in greater depth what we know about the psychological and neural underpinnings of visual artistic creativity and how these are further distinguished as a function of artistic expertise. Moreover, researchers in the field of rehabilitation who subscribe to the empowerment and inclusion paradigm may contemplate using the benefits of visual arts‐based research to achieve their goals. 113 , 161 Consequently, visual arts‐based research can have the additional effects of empowerment interventions, and they may be a foundation for developing and refining formal best practices for this emerging research approach. 162 Unlike verbal or visuospatial creativity, kinesthetic forms of dance and sports involve sensations of whole‐body movement, or “kinesthesia,” which refers to the integration of information from the vestibular system (the sensory experience of balance and spatial orientation) and the proprioceptive system (the sensory experience of forces within the body's muscles, tendons, and joints). 2 Some accounts of kinesthesia include proprioception and exteroception (the sensory experience—visual, auditory, and tactile—from stimuli outside the body), making kinesthesia integral to multisensory and active perception. 163 The transient hypofrontality hypothesis of flow is further elaborated upon concerning performance‐based creativity. Therefore, a multiple‐factor model that adopts evolutionary perspectives and focuses explicitly on forms of creativity akin to kinesthetic creativity can assist in specifying the detailed mechanisms that lead to creative responses in such contexts. Trust and confidence in exerting exquisite control over one's bodily movement are crucial elements that cannot be ignored in this context. 2 , 163 Achieving optimal performance in physical activities requires precise timing, rhythm, and synchronicity in movements throughout the entire body. The proximal conditions in these situations can be easily determined, and the phenomenon of flow experience is positively correlated with actual superior performance. 18 , 131 , 132 , 164 Some studies have proposed that activities involving the entire body's movement are more favorable for inducing flow experiences than other activities. 133 , 165 , 166 Therefore, dancers or athletes tend to indicate greater levels of dispositional flow than opera singers. 167 Regarding brain plasticity in the context of kinesthetic creativity, Murillo‐Garcia et al. 168 conducted a systematic review demonstrating the significant impact of dance‐based interventions in reducing the effects of fibromyalgia and pain. The subgroup analyses have indicated that creative dance‐based interventions may have greater efficacy than repetitive interventions in reducing the effects of fibromyalgia and pain. Given the significant heterogeneity and limited number of articles, caution must be taken when interpreting the results. Moreover, physical exercise has positively influenced EFs and neuroplasticity, 169 , 170 , 171 , 174 particularly in aging populations. 172 , 173 The reasons for improving EFs induced by regular exercise seem to be facilitated by the interaction between the brain, sympathetic, and parasympathetic systems that influence regional cerebral blood flow and the production and release of neurotransmitters and psychological factors (Figure 5 ). Zooming in on the neurobiological mechanisms of the positive influence of exercise concerning human physiology is essential to better understand the phenomenon of the flow of experience related to kinesthetic creativity. The five most extensively studied key neurobiological pathways supporting physical exercise have been assembled in a review by Chen and Nakagawa. 173 According to this review, five mechanisms explain how enhancing exercise performance and the associated body's adaptations benefit the brain by enhancing EFs. These five mechanisms require interaction between the brain, sympathetic, and parasympathetic nervous systems (Figure 6 ). One of the mechanisms involves releasing growth factors necessary for neurogenesis and angiogenesis (i.e., the development of neurons and blood vessels). The second mechanism entails lactate synthesis, which supplies the brain with energy, generates glutamate, and preserves long‐term potentiation. The third mechanism depends on the release of anti‐inflammatory cytokines that reduce neuroinflammation. The fourth mechanism includes increased mitochondrial biogenesis and antioxidant enzyme activity that lower oxidative stress. The final mechanism implicates the release of neurotransmitters such as dopamine and serotonin that control neurogenesis and affect cognition. Thus, the type and intensity of physical activity (i.e., duration, etc.) determine the magnitude of the positive effects on EFs, which should also be considered when physically engaged in exercise. 173 , 174 Despite these fascinating positive influences of physical exercises on inducing brain plasticity, their impacts on creative thinking are still mixed, and further research is required in this framework. For instance, improved positive mood and ideational flexibility have been reported following a brief aerobic workout. 175 However, factors like athletic expertise, the intensity of exercise, and the type of creativity measurement also need to be evaluated. One study by Colzato et al. 176 showed that non‐athletes exhibit poorer convergence of creativity under intense exercise than moderate exercise or rest. In contrast, athletes' convergent thinking (CT) was not significantly different across the three conditions. Moreover, athleticism did not affect DT, but ideational flexibility was superior under rest conditions than intense exercise across all participants. The benefits of simple physical activity such as walking vary relative to the creativity measure; such activity improved ideational originality performance in 81% of individuals with DT but only 23% for CT. 177 Consequently, future research agendas on effective creative therapy should consider all these elements across the different creativity domains when implementing experimental designs. The power of brain plasticity in improving EFs across three types of creativity is summarized in Figure 7 . 3.2. The tie between creativity and risk‐taking, mental illness and substance abuse: fact or fiction? In an excellent review by Heilman 178 on the possible mechanisms of creativity, it is pointed out that creative individuals are often risk‐takers and novelty seekers—the behaviors that are associated with activating the ventral striatal reward neural system; however, the correlation between risk‐taking and creativity has been insufficiently explored. Tyagi et al. 179 conducted an extensive systematic review of this connection, examining the relationships between creativity and five distinct types of risk‐taking (financial, health and safety, recreational, ethical, and social). The findings of the offline study revealed that creativity is linked to a strong propensity for risk‐taking in the social domain rather than in other areas. Indeed, the online study, with a larger sample size and a more diverse population, revealed that the likelihood of social risk‐taking was the most effective predictor of creative personality and ideation scores. When it comes to musicians and risk‐taking, other considerations should be taken into account. Here are the two sides of the coin. The first side is that while it is well known that musicians strive for flawless performances and perfection, avoiding errors at all costs, the other side is that musicians must be willing to take risks and potentially make errors to achieve innovation or exceptional performance. 180 Coping with errors during practice or performance can be a source of frustration, and the experience of anger and despair may account for the generally unfavorable disposition of musicians toward errors and their inclination to strive for flawless learning in the context of instrumental music education. 180 These results pointed to the need for a more multifaceted conceptualization of creativity and other related cognitive processes and for treating creativity and risk‐taking as multidimensional attributes. This calls for more studies using EEG and fMRI to determine the brain structures linked to risk‐taking tendencies during creative performance across different domains. The concept that creativity and mental illness are strongly related and have a long history has been advocated from multiple perspectives (e.g., psychoanalytic, cognitive, clinical, genetic, and evolutionary 181 , 182 , 183 , 184 ). The guiding rationale is “paradoxical functional facilitation,” where direct or indirect neural deficiencies can facilitate psychological functions. 185 Although the field of neuroscience of creativity remains polarized on the nature of the link between creativity and mental illness, 2 , 101 with some scholars even questioning its validity, 186 , 187 , 188 the empirical basis of this association is mainly derived from the raised incidence of severe mental illness, particularly bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia, among eminent and high achievers in creative professions. 189 , 190 , 191 , 192 , 194 Along with circumstantial accounts, much empirical evidence (mainly from psychology) suggests an association—even if modest and complex—between mental illness and creativity. 101 , 195 In contrast, there is growing evidence for the opposite association, particularly from the public or community mental health discipline, which indicates that engaging in creative pursuits improves mental well‐being. 196 , 197 This notion is the logic behind using art therapies to manage various health‐relevant conditions. 198 Although it appears counterintuitive that both of these ideas can co‐exist, this may be possible as they reflect various aspects of the same associative link and refer to several levels of functionality. 199 The associations between specific forms of mental illness and a high inclination for creativity are pervasive. The higher prevalence of mental illness in people who work in creative professions, such as writers and artists, primarily informs this premise. 190 Many empirical studies have also examined how creative thinking is associated with specific forms of mental illness, such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, and their subclinical variants. 101 , 195 , 200 The rationale for explaining the apparent advantages of specific aspects of creative cognition for such groups comes from claims that biased information processing (e.g., cognitive disinhibition or overinclusive thinking) usually leads to insufficiencies in goal‐directed thought and action in some contexts (i.e., negative biases). These negative biases can lead to particular advantages in open‐ended contexts that call for creativity in thought and action (i.e., positive biases). There is ample literature on the tie between mental illness, substance abuse, and creativity (especially literary creativity) that is relevant to the questions posed when studying the neuroscience of these issues. Creative writers have been singled out as having a propensity toward mental illness and substance abuse. 189 , 193 , 201 , 202 , 203 , 204 There are several open questions about the nature of the association between creativity and mental illness, three of which are highlighted here. The first is the shape of the association, with some researchers arguing for an inverted‐U function of sorts (e.g., 32 , 205 , 206 ). The second concerns integrating what we know about the link between creativity and mental illness; some literature, for example, suggests that creativity is positively related to mental well‐being. The third question is about what comes first, creativity or mental illness. It is particularly relevant in the context of vulnerability to substance abuse, the use of psychostimulants, * and the cultural context of use and creative achievement. 207 Recent reports did not reveal a significant effect of different types of psychostimulants on DT and CT in healthy 208 and unhealthy (i.e., attention‐deficit/hyperactivity disorder; ADHD) populations. 209 The study by Baas et al. 208 reported on methylphenidate as a cognitive enhancer, and the results did not indicate any effects on divergent or convergent creative processes, regardless of individual differences in working memory capacity or impulsivity. Hoogman et al. 209 reviewed 31 behavioral studies examining the relationship between creativity and ADHD. This review distinguished between various research designs, age groups, creativity measurements, and psychostimulants' effects, reflecting the potential underlying neural mechanisms of creativity and ADHD. Most studies found evidences for increased DT in those with high ADHD scores (subclinical) but not in those with the disorder (clinical). The creative abilities and achievement rates were high among clinical and subclinical groups. There was no evidence for increased CT abilities in ADHD, nor did the analyses indicate an overall negative effect of psychostimulants on creativity. Given the scarcity of research and investigations regarding the correlation between psychostimulants, mental disorders, and creativity, more research is required to formulate more comprehensive and concrete conclusions. Conducting more research on creative professionals across various domains is imperative to establish precise links. The current literature does not provide a definitive conclusion, and excluding creative professionals from the study may hinder accuracy. 3.3. Awakening creative production and enriching the creative state of mind in Dementia patients The empirical root for the view that reduced top–down or concept‐driven processing leads to enhanced creativity emerges from various sources. The most compelling of these sources is the study of individuals with savant skills. These skills are defined as having exceptional or prodigious capabilities in at least one domain (e.g., art, music, speed calculation, memory) far exceeding any typical level. Around 10% of those with savant skills are classified as “acquired savants,” their skills suddenly manifest following a stroke, † dementia, ‡ or head injury. § Most are classified as “congenital savants,” their skills are visible very early during development; therefore, ASDs is overwhelmingly associated with this condition (estimated between 50 and 75%). Conversely, one in 10 people with ASDs also exhibits savant skills. 210 Similarly, some studies included people with savant syndrome, whose savant skills persist despite considerable neurodevelopmental disorders or brain injuries. 211 , 212 Many fascinating case studies have examined the presence of savant skills alongside psychological deficits 213 ; see Table 1 . A spectacular case is that of Nadia Chomyn , an autistic savant with profound language and social deficits who began drawing at the age of 3. While Nadia inexplicably lost her ability to draw before puberty, most experts do not exhibit this pattern. The aesthetic value of her sketches as a 7‐year‐old was deemed comparable to some of those by Leonardo da Vinci . 214 A case in point is Stephen Wiltshire , whose extraordinary drafting skills show no signs of decline. There are numerous case studies of artists who have suffered altered brain function or experienced forms of brain damage. 215 , 216 Prominent examples include the artists Willem de Kooning (Alzheimer's disease), Louis Corinth (visuospatial neglect following a right hemisphere stroke), and Vincent van Gogh (psychosis, substance abuse, and epilepsy). 2 While artists with brain deficits show a range of psychological deficits, such as memory retrieval and language production, they continue to produce art unobstructed unless their motor functions are directly affected. 3 , 4 , 129 These remarkable states have been taken as evidence of the damage‐resistant capacity of the human brain and its power to communicate and express itself through art. 217 , 218 Music‐making and listening are used in neurorehabilitation to improve deficits in speech, motor function, and other psychological functions arising from brain disorders (i.e., following a stroke or with the onset of neurodegenerative disease). In this context, widely used techniques for neurorehabilitation include melodic intonation therapy, auditory‐motor mapping training, music‐support therapy, and auditory rhythmic movement. Creative arts‐based therapies are also used in poststroke rehabilitation to enhance the quality of life, and there is accumulating evidence of improvements in EFs, mood, and well‐being when using neurorehabilitation to treat the effects of normal aging. 129 , 142 , 219 , 220 , 221 , 222 , 223 Different art modalities are perceived as helping patients achieve several therapeutic goals, and interventions that offer opportunities to experience other art modalities to enhance cognitive flexibility. As a result, more research is required to determine the differential benefits or particular advantages of using single or multiple art modalities in creative arts‐based therapies. De novo artistic proficiency is another fascinating occurrence where artistic tendencies suddenly develop in non‐artists following brain injury, see Table 1 . This de novo generative capacity often manifests in the visual and musical arts and is associated with various conditions, including frontotemporal dementia (FTD), ¶ migraine, epilepsy, and traumatic brain injury. 228 The single most common case studies of individuals with specific neurological damage have been examinations of neurological patients with specific forms of FTD who develop de novo creative abilities or individuals who have savant‐like capabilities. 211 , 217 , 224 , 225 , 226 , 227 In the first research study of its kind, Miller et al. 226 reported on three patients who became accomplished painters following the onset of FTD. All three had the temporal‐lobe variant of FTD, whereby their frontal lobe was relatively intact but their temporal poles were dysfunctional. While the de novo emergence of artistic proficiency is a rare occurrence in these conditions and features in only a minority of cases (e.g., 17% of the 69 FTD patients reported in 225 ), there are consistent behaviors across cases (e.g., compulsiveness of the need to paint) that deserve further elaborate analysis. It is also highly probable that the appearance of such features is underreported. 228 Because most individuals beset with such conditions do not display enhanced musical skills, and because of the heterogeneity regarding the brain correlates of such disorders and the extensive networks involved, 229 it is not yet possible to specify which regions of the brain are especially significant in the sudden emergence or unexpected presence of musical capacity. Although brain injury causes flaws in certain facets of functioning (such as loss of semantic understanding, social awareness, or speech production), it can also result in enhanced de novo abilities relevant to visual art or music, as shown in the previously mentioned case studies of individuals with FTD. 217 , 225 , 226 However, these cases represent a rare manifestation and are only seen in a subset of patients, such as those with FTD, where the degeneration of brain tissue affects the temporal lobe but not the frontal lobe. It is also crucial to remark that, in contrast to the case of savants, the skills shown in this context of neurodegenerative disorders are rarely extraordinary. Nevertheless, they are wholly unexpected, given the level of skills exhibited by the patient before the neurological insult. In such neurological cases, turning to art is innovative; the created art is not necessarily creative. 218 The motivation or drive to communicate despite language and communication deficits in neurological disorders may explain such behaviors; thus, art provides an alternative form of expression and communication. 218 Unlike visual art and music domain studies, literary domain studies rarely examine de novo creative emergence after a neurological insult. Among these rare studies is the case report by Wu et al. 230 on literary creativity in three neurological patients following primary progressive aphasia or semantic dementia. Their brain scans revealed relative sparing of some parts of the lateral temporal lobe within the superior and middle temporal gyri alongside severe atrophy of the temporal poles and medial temporal regions, such as the amygdala and parahippocampal gyri, and limbic regions like the insula. 230 Some neuropsychologists question the vast utility of neuroimaging approaches to providing theoretically relevant insights about behavioral and brain functioning, 231 , 232 while others have identified specific contexts in which neuroscientific and neuropsychological approaches can be used together. 233 We argue that combining both neuroscientific and neuropsychological approaches will enable us to progress our understanding of the psychological function of creativity in different domains concerning physiological factors of its mental operations in health and disease. The discipline of neuropsychology aims to better understand the function of human psychology concerning physiology by examining dysfunctions of the brain. 178 , 234 , 235 , 236 , 237 Such investigations can be undertaken through single‐case studies of individuals with specific neurological damage or group studies on populations that reflect specific neurological disorders or psychiatric conditions. In both situations, the guiding factor is that the psychological dysfunctions accompanying brain injuries or deficits are exceedingly informative about the healthy human brain. While the advantage of the neuropsychological approach is its ability to be theoretically informative, the disadvantage is its inability to fully control for the impact of co‐morbidities (emotional, motivational, motoric, etc.) that often accompany brain dysfunctions. Neuroscientists use brain‐process and process‐brain approaches to explain neuroplasticity, whereas clinicians (mainly neurologists and psychiatrists) utilize these approaches to promote the “brain potential” in disease recovery or slowdown. Integrating the three specialties can provide precise explanations for using creativity as an effective intervention/therapy (Figure 8 ). Therefore, it is imperative to examine the neural mechanisms of artists and other creative professionals who have experienced brain injuries. This will allow us to gain details from previous case studies employing integrative approaches. It is crucial to note that the mere acquisition of artistic skills, such as playing music or painting, does not necessarily qualify as a “creative” act. The distinction lies in the fact that the act of “creating something” is distinct from the act of “creating something that is creative.” 2 , 52 , 78 , 79 , 92 , 114 , 238 , 239 , 240 , 241 4. SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS This review provides a synopsis of the creative mind and the power of creative therapy, as viewed through the lens of neurobiology. This synopsis underlines several pivotal questions that still demand further exploration to implement creative therapy approaches effectively. The various challenges in studying creativity compared to other complex psychological functions lend themselves to objective scientific investigation; thus, the neuroscience of creativity needs up‐to‐date, empirically testable ideas that maintain ecological and biological validity and reveal underlying mechanisms. As most creativity tasks are not designed to tease apart such closely coupled cognitive capacities, one can draw only limited conclusions about the dynamics of the underlying mental operations. Therefore, the associated brain correlates have yet to be established and merit further investigation from a theoretical standpoint. These reasons prompted us to reflect on the overlooked potentials of creativity in health and disease such as creative therapy and how it could positively and significantly improve our well‐being, providing a glimmer of hope, particularly for those suffering from neurodegenerative diseases. Here, we argue for implementing effective creative therapeutic approaches in different creativity domains (arts, music, sport, dance, etc.), which necessitates a comprehensive and integrative awareness of how our current knowledge from the psychological and neuroscientific literature informs us about the distinctive mechanisms of de novo abilities. In light of the state of the art of research and literature on creativity from a neuroscience viewpoint, we are constrained, as the studies of brain plasticity underlying creativity require elaborate investigations. Hence, it is crucial to acknowledge these limitations to avoid overgeneralization and maintain a firm footing on the path of authentic and accurate exploration. Using examples from various creative disciplines, we discuss what future studies should focus on. Lastly, we highlight awakening creative production and enriching the state of mind in dementia patients, which opens the gate to properly contemplating creative therapy. CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors declare that this work has no conflict of interest. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This review article is an outcome of the debate developed after the Creativity Symposium during Mediterranean Neuroscience Society (MNS), 2022, held in Dubrovnik, Croatia. We appreciate MNS for providing the platform to articulate our perspectives on creative therapy from the vantage points of neuroscience and neurology in this review article. Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. Khalil R, Demarin V. Creative therapy in health and disease: Inner vision. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2024;30:e14266. doi: 10.1111/cns.14266 Endnotes # Beta brain waves indicate focused attention and alertness. * Psychostimulants are a class of drugs that significantly impact cognitive and emotional functioning and behavior. Psychostimulants are conventionally limited to cocaine and amphetamines. Nicotine, caffeine, and selected antidepressants may be classified within this category. Methylphenidate, dextroamphetamine, and pemoline (the latter of which was withdrawn from the market due to hepatotoxicity) have been extensively utilized to control attention‐deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). † A stroke occurs when a brain blood artery bursts or a blood vessel stops blood flow. ‡ Dementia is the inability to remember, think, or make decisions that interfere with daily life. Most people with dementia have Alzheimer's. Dementia typically affects elderly people. § Brain injury can manifest as either a closed or open (penetrating) injury to the head. A closed head injury refers to an instance where an individual has experienced severe damage to the head, without any accompanying fracture to the skull, resulting from contact with an object. ¶ A core feature of brain disorders such as savant syndrome. 210 , 212 , 225 , 242 DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed during the current study. REFERENCES 1. Herrmann N. The creative brain. J Creat Behav. 1991;25(4):275‐295. doi: 10.1002/j.2162-6057.1991.tb01140.x 2. Abraham A. The Neuroscience of Creativity. Cambridge University Press; 2018. 3. Demarin V. In: Demarin V. (ed.) Mind and Brain: Bridging Neurology and Psychiatry. Springer International Publishing; 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-38606-1 4. Demarin V, Bedeković M, Puretić M, Pašić M. Arts, brain and cognition. Psychiatr Danub. 2016;28:343‐348. 5. May R. The courage to create. Norton; 1975. 6. Torrance EP. Scientific Views of Creativity and Factors Affecting its Growth Definitions of Creativity. JSTOR. 1965;94:663‐681. 7. Torrance EP. A longitudinal examination of the fourth grade slump in creativity. Gift Child Q. 1968;12(4):195‐199. doi: 10.1177/001698626801200401 8. Torrance EP. The Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking: Norms‐Technical Manual. Research Edition. Verbal Tests, Forms A and B. Figural Tests, Forms A and B. Personnel Press; 1974. 9. Shaughnessy MF. An interview with E Paul Torrance: About creativity. Educ Psychol Rev. 1998;10(4):441‐452. 10. Sternberg RJ, Lubart TI. An investment theory of creativity and its development. Hum Dev. 1991;34(1):1‐31. doi: 10.1159/000277029 11. Sternberg RJ. Creating a vision of creativity: The first 25 years. Psychol Aesthet Creat Arts. 2006;S(1):2‐12. doi: 10.1037/1931-3896.S.1.2 12. Maslow AH. A theory of human motivation. Psychol Rev. 1943;50(4):370‐396. doi: 10.1037/h0054346 13. Csikszentmihalyi M. Implications of a systems perspective for the study of creativity. In: Sternberg RJ, ed. Handbook of Creativity. Cambridge University Press; 1999:313‐335. 14. Csikszentmihalyi M. The Systems Model of Creativity. Springer Netherlands; 2014. doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-9085-7 15. Herrmann N. The Creative Brain. Train Dev. 1981;35(10):10‐16. 16. Holden C. Paul MacLean and the triune brain. Science. 1979;204(4397):1066‐1068. doi: 10.1126/science.377485 17. Koestler A. The Act of Creation. Macmillan; 1975. 18. Dietrich A. Neurocognitive mechanisms underlying the experience of flow. Conscious Cogn. 2004a;13(4):746‐761. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2004.07.002 19. Dietrich A. The cognitive neuroscience of creativity. Psychon Bull Rev. 2004b;11(6):1011‐1026. doi: 10.3758/BF03196731 20. Abraham A. The promises and perils of the neuroscience of creativity. Front Hum Neurosci. 2013;7:1‐9. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00246 21. Andreasen NC. Creativity in art and science: are there two cultures? Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2012;14(1):49‐54. doi: 10.31887/DCNS.2012.14.1/nandreasen 22. Bressler SL. Large‐scale cortical networks and cognition. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 1995;20(3):288‐304. doi: 10.1016/0165-0173(94)00016-i 23. Bressler SL, Menon V. Large‐scale brain networks in cognition: emerging methods and principles. Trends Cogn Sci. 2010;14(6):277‐290. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.04.004 24. Meehan TP, Bressler SL. Neurocognitive networks: Findings, models, and theory. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2012;36(10):2232‐2247. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.08.002 25. Beaty RE, Benedek M, Barry Kaufman S, Silvia PJ. Default and executive network coupling supports creative idea production. Sci Rep. 2015;5(1):10964. doi: 10.1038/srep10964 26. Ashby WR, Bassett M. The Effect of Leucotomy on Creative Ability. J Ment Sci. 1949;95(399):418‐430. doi: 10.1192/bjp.95.399.418 27. Reitman F. The creative spell of schizophrenics after leucotomy. Mental Sci. 1947;93(390):55‐61. 28. Martindale C, Hasenfus N. EEG differences as a function of creativity, stage of the creative process, and effort to be original. Biol Psychol. 1978;6(3):157‐167. doi: 10.1016/0301-0511(78)90018-2 29. Martindale C, Mines D. Creativity and cortical activation during creative, intellectual and EEG feedback tasks. Biol Psychol. 1975;3(2):91‐100. doi: 10.1016/0301-0511(75)90011-3 30. Orme‐Johnson DW, Haynes CT. EEG phase coherence, pure consciousness, creativity, and Tm—Sidhi Experiences. Int J Neurosci. 1981;13(4):211‐217. doi: 10.3109/00207458108985804 31. Abraham A. Creative thinking as orchestrated by semantic processing versus cognitive control brain networks. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014a;8:1‐6. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00095 32. Abraham A. Is there an inverted‐U relationship between creativity and psychopathology? Front Psychol. 2014b;5:750. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00750 33. Beaty RE, Benedek M, Silvia PJ, Schacter DL. Creative cognition and brain network dynamics. Trends Cogn Sci. 2016;20(2):87‐95. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2015.10.004 34. Beaty RE, Schacter DL. Creativity, self‐generated thought, and the Brain's default network. The Creative Self: Effect of Beliefs, Self‐Efficacy, Mindset, and Identity. Elsevier; 2017:171‐183. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-809790-8.00010-8 35. Beaty RE, Seli P, Schacter DL. Network neuroscience of creative cognition: mapping cognitive mechanisms and individual differences in the creative brain. Curr Opin Behav Sci. 2019;27:22‐30. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2018.08.013 36. Corazza GE, Agnoli S, Mastria S. The dynamic creativity framework: theoretical and empirical investigations. Eur Psychol. 2022;27:191‐206. doi: 10.1027/1016-9040/a000473 37. Jung RE, Mead BS, Carrasco J, Flores RA. The structure of creative cognition in the human brain. Front Hum Neurosci. 2013;7:330. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00330 38. Jung RE, Segall JM, Bockholt HJ, et al. Neuroanatomy of creativity. Hum Brain Mapp. 2010;31(3):398‐409. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20874 39. Jung RE, Vartanian O. The Cambridge handbook of the neuroscience of creativity. Cambridge University Press; 2018. 40. Khalil R, Lin L, Karim AA, Godde B. Response inhibition partly mediates the relationship between emotional states and creative divergent thinking. Creat Res J. 2023;1‐18. doi: 10.1080/10400419.2023.2192605 41. Silvia PJ, Beaty RE, Nusbaum EC, Eddington KM, Kwapil TR. Creative motivation: creative achievement predicts cardiac autonomic markers of effort during divergent thinking. Biol Psychol. 2014;102:30‐37. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2014.07.010 42. Laeng B, Eidet LM, Sulutvedt U, Panksepp J. Music chills: The eye pupil as a mirror to music's soul. Conscious Cogn. 2016;44:161‐178. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2016.07.009 43. Abraham A, Windmann S. Creative cognition: the diverse operations and the prospect of applying a cognitive neuroscience perspective. Methods. 2007;42(1):38‐48. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2006.12.007 44. Rhodes M. An analysis of creativity. Phi Delta Kappan. 1961;42:305‐310. 45. MacKinnon D. Creativity: a discussion at the Nobel conference. In: Roslansky JD, ed. Creativity: A Multi‐Faceted Phenomenon. Amsterdam, North‐Holland Pub. Co; 1970:17‐32. 46. Finke RA. Imagery, creativity, and emergent structure. Conscious Cogn. 1996;5(3):381‐393. doi: 10.1006/ccog.1996.0024 47. Ward TB, Finke RA, Smith SM. Creativity and the Mind: Discovering the Genius within. Perseus Books; 1995. 48. Ward TB, Smith SM, Vaid J. In: Ward TB, Smith SM, Vaid J, eds. Creative Thought: an Investigation of Conceptual Structures and Processes. American Psychological Association; 1997. doi: 10.1037/10227-000 49. Ward TB, Smith SM, Finke RA. Creative Cognition. Handbook of Creativity. Cambridge University Press. 1999:189‐212. 50. Kounios J, Beeman M. The cognitive neuroscience of insight. Annu Rev Psychol. 2014;65(1):71‐93. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115154 51. Abraham A, Schubotz RI, von Cramon DY. Thinking about the future versus the past in personal and non‐personal contexts. Brain Res. 2008;1233:106‐119. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.07.084 52. Turner M, Fauconnier G. A mechanism of creativity. Poetics Today; 1999. 53. Khalil R, Godde B, Karim AA. The link between creativity, cognition, and creative drives and underlying neural mechanisms. Front Neural Circuits. 2019;13:1‐16. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2019.00018 54. Khalil R, Moustafa AA. A neurocomputational model of creative processes. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2022;137:104656. doi: 10.1016/J.NEUBIOREV.2022.104656 55. Beaty RE, Christensen AP, Benedek M, Silvia PJ, Schacter DL. Creative constraints: brain activity and network dynamics underlying semantic interference during idea production. NeuroImage. 2017;148:189‐196. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.01.012 56. Dietrich A. Where in the brain is creativity: a brief account of a wild‐goose chase. Curr Opin Behav Sci. 2019a;27:36‐39. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2018.09.001 57. Dietrich A, Kanso R. A review of EEG, ERP, and neuroimaging studies of creativity and insight. Psychol Bull. 2010;136(5):822‐848. doi: 10.1037/a0019749 58. Xie H, Beaty RE, Jahanikia S, Geniesse C, Sonalkar NS, Saggar M. Spontaneous and deliberate modes of creativity: multitask eigen‐connectivity analysis captures latent cognitive modes during creative thinking. NeuroImage. 2021;243:118531. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118531 59. Bogen JE, Bogen GM. The other side of the brain. 3. The corpus callosum and creativity. Bull Los Angel Neurol Soc. 1969;34(4):191‐220. 60. Hoppe KD. Hemispheric specialization and creativity. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 1988;11(3):303‐315. 61. Miran M, Miran E. Cerebral asymmetries: neuropsychological measurement and theoretical issues. Biol Psychol. 1984;19(3–4):295‐304. doi: 10.1016/0301-0511(84)90044-9 62. Dorfman L, Martindale C, Gassimova V, Vartanian O. Creativity and speed of information processing: a double dissociation involving elementary versus inhibitory cognitive tasks. Personal Individ Differ. 2008;44(6):1382‐1390. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2007.12.006 63. Schlegel A, Alexander P, Tse PU. Information processing in the mental workspace is fundamentally distributed. J Cogn Neurosci. 2016;28(2):295‐307. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_00899 64. Vartanian O, Martindale C, Kwiatkowski J. Creative potential, attention, and speed of information processing. Personal Individ Differ. 2007;43(6):1470‐1480. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2007.04.027 65. Goel V. Creative brains: designing in the real world. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014;8:1‐14. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00241 66. Gold R, Faust M, Ben‐Artzi E. Metaphors and verbal creativity: the role of the right hemisphere. Laterality. 2012;17(5):602‐614. doi: 10.1080/1357650X.2011.599936 67. Lindell AK. Lateral thinkers are not so laterally minded: hemispheric asymmetry, interaction, and creativity. Laterality. 2011;16(4):479‐498. doi: 10.1080/1357650X.2010.497813 68. Vartanian O, Goel V. Neural correlates of creative cognition. In: Martindale C., Locher P., Petrov V., Berleant A. (eds.) Evolutionary and Neurocognitive Approaches to Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts. Routledge; 2019:195‐207. doi: 10.4324/9781315224657-13 69. Tharp IJ, Pickering AD. Individual differences in cognitive‐flexibility: the influence of spontaneous eyeblink rate, trait psychoticism and working memory on attentional set‐shifting. Brain Cogn. 2011;75(2):119‐125. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2010.10.010 70. Wilson RC, Guilford JP, Christensen PR. The measurement of individual differences in originality. Psychol Bull. 1953;50(5):362‐370. doi: 10.1037/h0060857 71. Atchley RA, Keeney M, Burgess C. Cerebral hemispheric mechanisms linking ambiguous word meaning retrieval and creativity. Brain Cogn. 1999;40:479‐499. 10.1006/brcg.1999.1080 72. Carlsson I, Wendt PE, Risberg J. On the neurobiology of creativity. Differences in frontal activity between high and low creative subjects. Neuropsychologia. 2000;38(6):873‐885. doi: 10.1016/S0028-3932(99)00128-1 73. Gazzaniga MS. Cerebral specialization and interhemispheric communication: does the corpus callosum enable the human condition? Brain. 2000;123(7):1293‐1326. doi: 10.1093/brain/123.7.1293 74. Durante D, Dunson DB. Bayesian inference and testing of group differences in brain networks. Bayesian Anal. 2018;1:29‐58. 10.1214/16-BA1030 75. Patil AU, Ghate S, Madathil D, Tzeng OJL, Huang HW, Huang CM. Static and dynamic functional connectivity supports the configuration of brain networks associated with creative cognition. Sci Rep. 2021;11(1):165. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-80293-2 76. Khalil R. Understanding the Role of Executive Functions for Decision‐Making and Creative Thinking: Computational and Experimental Approaches by Doctor of Philosophy in Neuroscience. Jacobs University Bremen; 2021. http://nbn‐resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:gbv:579‐opus‐1009551. 77. Dietrich A. Types of creativity. Psychon Bull Rev. 2019b;26(1):1‐12. doi: 10.3758/s13423-018-1517-7 78. Beaty RE, Benedek M, Wilkins RW, et al. Creativity and the default network: a functional connectivity analysis of the creative brain at rest. Neuropsychologia. 2014a;64:92‐98. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.09.019 79. Beaty RE, Nusbaum EC, Silvia PJ. Does insight problem solving predict real‐world creativity? Psychol Aesthet Creat Arts. 2014b;8(3):287‐292. doi: 10.1037/a0035727 80. Benedek M, Rosenberg MD, Christensen AP, et al. Robust prediction of individual creative ability from brain functional connectivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2018;115(5):1087‐1092. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1713532115 81. Razumnikova OM. Creativity related cortex activity in the remote associates task. Brain Res Bull. 2007;73:96‐102. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2007.02.008 82. Mednick S. The associative basis of the creative process. Psychol Rev. 1962;69(3):220‐232. doi: 10.1037/h0048850 83. Mendelsohn GA. Associative and attentional processes in creative performance. J Pers. 1976;44(2):341‐369. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6494.1976.tb00127.x 84. Gao Z, Zhang D, Liang A, et al. Exploring the associations between intrinsic brain connectivity and creative ability using functional connectivity strength and connectome analysis. Brain Connect. 2017;7(9):590‐601. doi: 10.1089/brain.2017.0510 85. Marron TR, Lerner Y, Berant E, et al. Chain free association, creativity, and the default mode network. Neuropsychologia. 2018;118:40‐58. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.03.018 86. Binder JR, Desai RH. The neurobiology of semantic memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 2011;15(11):527‐536. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2011.10.001 87. Binder JR, Desai RH, Graves WW, Conant LL. Where is the semantic system? A critical review and meta‐analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies. Cereb Cortex. 2009;19(12):2767‐2796. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp055 88. Jefferies E. The neural basis of semantic cognition: converging evidence from neuropsychology, neuroimaging and TMS. Cortex. 2013;49(3):611‐625. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.10.008 89. Lau EF, Phillips C, Poeppel D. A cortical network for semantics: (de)constructing the N400. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008;9(12):920‐933. doi: 10.1038/nrn2532 90. Vartanian O, Saint SA, Herz N, Suedfeld P. The creative brain under stress: Considerations for performance in extreme environments. Front Psychol. 2020;11:585969. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.585969 91. de Pisapia N, Bacci F, Parrott D, Melcher D. Brain networks for visual creativity: a functional connectivity study of visual artwork planning. Sci Rep. 2016;6(1):39185. doi: 10.1038/srep39185 92. Beaty RE, Silvia PJ, Nusbaum EC, Jauk E, Benedek M. The roles of associative and executive processes in creative cognition. Mem Cogn. 2014c;42:1186‐1197. doi: 10.3758/s13421-014-0428-8 93. Beaty RE, Thakral PP, Madore KP, Benedek M, Schacter DL. Core network contributions to remembering the past, imagining the future, and thinking creatively. J Cogn Neurosci. 2018;30(12):1939‐1951. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01327 94. Aron AR. The neural basis of inhibition in cognitive control. Neuroscientist. 2007;13(3):214‐228. doi: 10.1177/1073858407299288 95. Aron AR, Robbins TW, Poldrack RA. Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex: one decade on. Trends Cogn Sci. 2014;18(4):177‐185. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.12.003 96. Munakata Y, Herd S, Chatham C, Depue B, Banich M, O'Reilly R. A unified framework for inhibitory control. Trends Cogn Sci. 2011;15(10):453‐459. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2011.07.011 97. Munakata Y, Snyder HR, Chatham CH. Developing cognitive control: three key transitions. Curr Dir Psychol Sci. 2012;21(2):71‐77. doi: 10.1177/0963721412436807 98. Robbins TW, Gillan CM, Smith DG, de Wit S, Ersche KD. Neurocognitive endophenotypes of impulsivity and compulsivity: towards dimensional psychiatry. Trends Cogn Sci. 2012;16(1):81‐91. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2011.11.009 99. Bubić A, Abraham A. Neurocognitive bases of future oriented cognition. Rev Psychol. 2014;43:3‐15. 100. Levens SM, Larsen JT, Bruss J, Tranel D, Bechara A, Mellers BA. What might have been? The role of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and lateral orbitofrontal cortex in counterfactual emotions and choice. Neuropsychologia. 2014;54:77‐86. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.10.026 101. Abraham A. Editorial: madness and creativity: yes, no or maybe? Front Psychol. 2015;6:1‐3. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01055 102. Bhargava P. The psychology of creativity. J Am Coll Radiol. 2015;12(9):1000‐1001. doi: 10.1016/j.jacr.2014.09.041 103. Shi L, Sun J, Xia Y, et al. Large‐scale brain network connectivity underlying creativity in resting‐state and task fMRI: cooperation between default network and frontal‐parietal network. Biol Psychol. 2018;135:102‐111. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2018.03.005 104. Chi RP, Snyder AW. Facilitate Insight by Non‐Invasive Brain Stimulation. PLoS One. 2011;6(2):e16655. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016655 105. Jung‐Beeman M, Bowden EM, Haberman J, et al. Neural Activity When People Solve Verbal Problems with Insight. PLoS Biol. 2004;2(4):e97. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0020097 106. Schneider W, Shiffrin RM. Controlled and automatic human information processing: I. detection, search, and attention. Psychol Rev. 1977;84(1):1‐66. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.84.1.1 107. Schlegel A, Kohler PJ, Fogelson Sv, Alexander P, Konuthula D, Tse PU. Network structure and dynamics of the mental workspace. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2013;110(40):16277‐16282. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1311149110 108. Capaldi C, Passmore H‐A, Nisbet E, Zelenski J, Dopko R. Flourishing in nature: a review of the benefits of connecting with nature and its application as a wellbeing intervention. International Journal of Wellbeing. 2015;5(4):1‐16. doi: 10.5502/ijw.v5i4.449 109. Schertz KE, Berman MG. Understanding nature and its cognitive benefits. Curr Dir Psychol Sci. 2019;28(5):496‐502. doi: 10.1177/0963721419854100 110. White MP, Alcock I, Grellier J, et al. Spending at least 120 minutes a week in nature is associated with good health and wellbeing. Sci Rep. 2019;9(1):7730. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-44097-3 111. White MP, Yeo NL, Vassiljev P, et al. A prescription for “nature” – the potential of using virtual nature in therapeutics. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2018;14:3001‐3013. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S179038 112. Diamond A. Executive Functions. Annu Rev Psychol. 2013;64(1):135‐168. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-113011-143750 113. Schlegel A, Alexander P, Fogelson SV, et al. The artist emerges: visual art learning alters neural structure and function. NeuroImage. 2015;105:440‐451. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.11.014 114. Fink A, Benedek M, Grabner RH, Staudt B, Neubauer AC. Creativity meets neuroscience: experimental tasks for the neuroscientific study of creative thinking. Methods. 2007;42:68‐76. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2006.12.001 115. Abbott LF, Nelson SB. Synaptic plasticity: taming the beast. Nat Neurosci. 2000;3(S11):1178‐1183. doi: 10.1038/81453 116. Blitz DM, Foster K a, Regehr WG. Short‐term synaptic plasticity: a comparison of two synapses. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004;5:630‐640. doi: 10.1038/nrn1475 117. Buonomano D v, Merzenich MM. Cortical plasticity: from synapses to maps. Annu Rev Neurosci. 1998;21:149‐186. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.21.1.149 118. Caporale N, Dan Y. Spike timing–dependent plasticity: a Hebbian learning rule. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2008;31(1):25‐46. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.060407.125639 119. Carcea I, Froemke RC. Cortical plasticity, excitatory‐inhibitory balance, and sensory perception. Prog Brain Res. 2013;207:65‐90. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63327-9.00003-5 120. Citri A, Malenka RC. Synaptic plasticity: multiple forms, functions, and mechanisms. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008;33:18‐41. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301559 121. Froemke RC. Plasticity of cortical excitatory‐inhibitory balance. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2015;38:195‐219. doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-071714-034002 122. Gerstner W. Hebbian learning and plasticity. In: Arbib M, Bonaiuto J, eds. From Neuron to Cognition Via Computational Neuroscience. MIT Press Cambridge; 2011:1‐25. 123. Hamada M, Strigaro G, Murase N, et al. Cerebellar modulation of human associative plasticity. J Physiol. 2012;590(10):2365‐2374. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.230540 124. Larsen RS, Sjöström PJ. Synapse‐type‐specific plasticity in local circuits. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2015;35:127‐135. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2015.08.001 125. Markram H, Gerstner W, Sjöström PJ. A history of spike‐timing‐dependent plasticity. Front Synaptic Neurosci. 2011;3:1‐24. doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2011.00004 126. Tamosiunaite M, Porr B, Wörgötter F. Self‐influencing synaptic plasticity: recurrent changes of synaptic weights can lead to specific functional properties. J Comput Neurosci. 2007;23(1):113‐127. doi: 10.1007/s10827-007-0021-2 127. Allen CB, Celikel T, Feldman DE. Long‐term depression induced by sensory deprivation during cortical map plasticity in vivo. Nat Neurosci. 2003;6:291‐299. doi: 10.1038/nn1012 128. Zavoreo I, Basic‐kes V, Demarin V. Stroke and neuroplasticity. Period Biol. 2012;114(3):393‐396. 129. Demarin V. The role of arts in enhancement of stroke recovery. Neurosonol Cerebral Hemodyn. 2017;13:111‐114. 130. Wollseiffen P, Schneider S, Martin LA, Kerhervé HA, Klein T, Solomon C. The effect of 6 h of running on brain activity, mood, and cognitive performance. Exp Brain Res. 2016;234(7):1829‐1836. doi: 10.1007/s00221-016-4587-7 131. Csikszentmihalyi M. Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention. Harper &amp; Row; 1997. 132. Csikszentmihalyi M. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. Harper Perennial; 2008. 133. Jackson SA, Eklund RC. Assessing flow in physical activity: the flow state scale–2 and dispositional flow scale–2. J Sport Exerc Psychol. 2002;24:133‐150. 134. Chrysikou EG. The costs and benefits of cognitive control for creativity. In: Jung RE, Vartanian O (eds.) The Cambridge Handbook of the Neuroscience of Creativity; 2018. doi: 10.1017/9781316556238.018 135. Chrysikou EG. Creativity in and out of (cognitive) control. Curr Opin Behav Sci. 2019;27:94‐99. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2018.09.014 136. Chrysikou EG, Weber MJ, Thompson‐Schill SL. A matched filter hypothesis for cognitive control. Neuropsychologia. 2014;62:341‐355. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.10.021 137. D'Ausilio A, Novembre G, Fadiga L, Keller PE. What can music tell us about social interaction? Trends Cogn Sci. 2015;19(3):111‐114. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2015.01.005 138. Daynes H. Communicative Musicality: Exploring the Basis of Human Companionship Edited by Stephen Malloch &amp; Colwyn Trevarthen. New York: Oxford University Press, 2009. 648 pp. ISBN: 978 0 19 856628 1. Br J Music Educ. 2010;27(2):204‐207. doi: 10.1017/S0265051710000112 139. Campbell D. The Mozart Effect: Tapping the Power of Music to Heal the Body, Strengthen the Mind, and Unlock the Creative Spirit. William Morrow &amp; Company; 2001. 140. Imfeld A, Oechslin MS, Meyer M, Loenneker T, Jancke L. White matter plasticity in the corticospinal tract of musicians: a diffusion tensor imaging study. NeuroImage. 2009;46:600‐607. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.02.025 141. Ragert P, Schmidt A, Altenmüller E, Dinse HR. Superior tactile performance and learning in professional pianists: evidence for meta‐plasticity in musicians. Eur J Neurosci. 2004;19(2):473‐478. doi: 10.1111/j.0953-816X.2003.03142.x 142. Schlaug G. Musicians and music making as a model for the study of brain plasticity. Prog Brain Res. 2015;217:37‐55. doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2014.11.020 143. Jebb T, Pfordresher Q. Exploring perception–action relations in music production: the asymmetric effect of tonal class. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform. 2016;42(5):658‐670. doi: 10.1037/xhp0000172 144. Pfordresher Q. Musical training and the role of auditory feedback during performance. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012;1252(1):171‐178. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06408.x 145. Limb CJ, Braun AR. Neural substrates of spontaneous musical performance: an fMRI study of jazz improvisation. PLoS One. 2008;3(2):e1679. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001679 146. Benedek M, Borovnjak B, Neubauer AC, Kruse‐Weber S. Creativity and personality in classical, jazz and folk musicians. Personal Individ Differ. 2014;63:117‐121. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2014.01.064 147. Beaty RE. The neuroscience of musical improvisation. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2015;51:108‐117. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.01.004 148. Loui P. Rapid and flexible creativity in musical improvisation: review and a model. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2018;1423(1):138‐145. doi: 10.1111/nyas.13628 149. Sloboda J. Improvisation: methodsand models. In: Sloboda JA, ed. Generative processes in music: the psychology of performance, improvisation, and composition. Oxford University Press; 2000. 150. Sovansky EE, Wieth MB, Francis AP, McIlhagga SD. Not all musicians are creative: creativity requires more than simply playing music. Psychol Music. 2016;44(1):25‐36. doi: 10.1177/0305735614551088 151. Alossa N, Castelli L. Amusia and musical functioning. Eur Neurol. 2009;61(5):269‐277. doi: 10.1159/000206851 152. Gosselin N, Paquette S, Peretz I. Sensitivity to musical emotions in congenital amusia. Cortex. 2015;71:171‐182. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.06.022 153. Stewart L, von Kriegstein K, Warren JD, Griffiths TD. Music and the brain: disorders of musical listening. Brain. 2006;129(10):2533‐2553. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl171 154. Molnar‐Szakacs I, Heaton P. Music: a unique window into the world of autism. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012;1252(1):318‐324. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06465.x 155. Khalil R, Tindle R, Boraud T, Moustafa AA, Karim AA. Social decision making in autism: on the impact of mirror neurons, motor control, and imitative behaviors. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2018;24(8):669‐676. doi: 10.1111/cns.13001 156. Geretsegger M, Elefant C, Mössler KA, Gold C. Music therapy for people with autism spectrum disorder. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;2014(3):CD004381. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004381.pub3 157. Altschuler E. Did cortical remapping lend artist a hand? Curr Biol. 2016;26(6):R228. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.02.035 158. Kennedy JM. Outline, mental states, and drawings by a blind woman. Perception. 2009;38(10):1481‐1496. doi: 10.1068/p6407 159. Amedi A, Merabet LB, Camprodon J, et al. Neural and behavioral correlates of drawing in an early blind painter: a case study. Brain Res. 2008;1242:252‐262. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.07.088 160. Likova LT. Drawing enhances cross‐modal memory plasticity in the human brain: a case study in a totally blind adult. Front Hum Neurosci. 2012;6:1‐15. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00044 161. Zabelina DL, Hechtman LA, Saporta A, Grunewald K, Beeman M. Brain activity sensitive to visual congruency effects relates to divergent thinking. Brain Cogn. 2019;135:103587. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2019.103587 162. Jay EK, Patterson C, Fernandez R, Moxham L. Experiences of recovery among adults with a mental illness using visual art methods: a systematic review. J Psychiatr Ment Health Nurs. 2022;30:361‐374. doi: 10.1111/jpm.12882 163. Reason M, Reynolds D. Kinesthesia, empathy, and related pleasures: an inquiry into audience experiences of watching dance. Dance Res J. 2010;42(2):49‐75. doi: 10.1017/S0149767700001030 164. van der Linden D, Tops M, Bakker AB. Go with the flow: a neuroscientific view on being fully engaged. Eur J Neurosci. 2021;53(4):947‐963. doi: 10.1111/ejn.15014 165. Gray K, Anderson S, Chen EE, et al. “Forward flow”: a new measure to quantify free thought and predict creativity. Am Psychol. 2019;74(5):539‐554. doi: 10.1037/amp0000391 166. Kawabata M, Mallett CJ. Flow experience in physical activity: examination of the internal structure of flow from a process‐related perspective. Motiv Emot. 2011;35(4):393‐402. doi: 10.1007/s11031-011-9221-1 167. Thomson P, Jaque SV. Overexcitability and optimal flow in talented dancers, singers, and athletes. Roeper Rev. 2016;38(1):32‐39. doi: 10.1080/02783193.2015.1112865 168. Murillo‐Garcia A, Adsuar JC, Villafaina S, Collado‐Mateo D, Gusi N. Creative versus repetitive dance therapies to reduce the impact of fibromyalgia and pain: a systematic review and meta‐analysis. Complement Ther Clin Pract. 2022;47:101577. doi: 10.1016/j.ctcp.2022.101577 169. Dietrich A, McDaniel WF. Endocannabinoids and exercise. Br J Sports Med. 2004;38(5):536‐541. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2004.011718 170. Kashihara K, Maruyama T, Murota M, Nakahara Y. Positive effects of acute and moderate physical exercise on cognitive function. J Physiol Anthropol. 2009;28(4):155‐164. doi: 10.2114/jpa2.28.155 171. Schulkin J. Evolutionary basis of human running and its impact on neural function. Front Syst Neurosci. 2016;10:1‐10. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2016.00059 172. Babaei P, Azari HB. Exercise training improves memory performance in older adults: a narrative review of evidence and possible mechanisms. Front Hum Neurosci. 2022;15:1‐15. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.771553 173. Chen C, Nakagawa S. Physical activity for cognitive health promotion: an overview of the underlying neurobiological mechanisms. Ageing Res Rev. 2023;86:1‐15. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2023.101868 174. Hötting K, Röder B. Beneficial effects of physical exercise on neuroplasticity and cognition. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2013;37(9):2243‐2257. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2013.04.005 175. Steinberg H, Sykes EA, Moss T, Lowery S, Leboutillier N, Dewey A. Exercise enhances creativity independently of mood. Br J Sports Med. 1997;31:240‐245. 176. Colzato LS, Szapora A, Pannekoek JN, Hommel B. The impact of physical exercise on convergent and divergent thinking. Front Hum Neurosci. 2013;7:1‐6. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00824 177. Oppezzo M, Schwartz DL. Give your ideas some legs: the positive effect of walking on creative thinking. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn. 2014;40(4):1142‐1152. doi: 10.1037/a0036577 178. Heilman M. Possible brain mechanisms of creativity. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2016;31(4):285‐296. doi: 10.1093/arclin/acw009 179. Tyagi V, Hanoch Y, Hall SD, Runco M, Denham SL. The risky side of creativity: domain specific risk taking in creative individuals. Front Psychol. 2017;8:1‐9. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00145 180. Kruse‐Weber S, Parncutt R. Error management for musicians: an interdisciplinary conceptual framework. Front Psychol. 2014;5:1‐14. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00777 181. Eysenck HJ. Genius. Cambridge University Press; 1995. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511752247 182. Ludwig AM. The Price of Greatness Resolving the Creativity and Madness Controversy. Guilford Press; 1995. 183. Nettle D. Strong Imagination: Madness, Creativity and Human Nature. Oxford University Press; 2001. 184. Richards RL. Relationships between creativity and psychopathology: an evaluation and interpretation of the evidence. Genet Psychol Monogr. 1981;103(2):261‐324. 185. Kapur N. Paradoxical functional facilitation in brain‐behaviour research. Brain. 1996;119(5):1775‐1790. doi: 10.1093/brain/119.5.1775 186. Dietrich A. The mythconception of the mad genius. Front Psychol. 2014;5:1‐3. 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00079 187. Rothenberg A. Essay: creativity—the healthy muse. Lancet. 2006;368:S8‐S9. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69905-4 188. Schlesinger J. Creative mythconceptions: a closer look at the evidence for the “mad genius” hypothesis. Psychol Aesthet Creat Arts. 2009;3(2):62‐72. doi: 10.1037/a0013975 189. Kyaga S, Landén M, Boman M, Hultman CM, Långström N, Lichtenstein P. Mental illness, suicide and creativity: 40‐year prospective total population study. J Psychiatr Res. 2013;47(1):83‐90. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2012.09.010 190. Kyaga S, Lichtenstein P, Boman M, Hultman C, Långström N, Landén M. Creativity and mental disorder: family study of 300 000 people with severe mental disorder. Br J Psychiatry. 2011;199(5):373‐379. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.110.085316 191. Lauronen E, Veijola J, Isohanni I, Jones PB, Nieminen P, Isohanni M. Links between creativity and mental disorder. Psychiatry. 2004;67(1):81‐98. doi: 10.1521/psyc.67.1.81.31245 192. Ludwig AM. Creative achievement and psychopathology: comparison among professions. Am J Psychother. 1992;46(3):330‐354. doi: 10.1176/appi.psychotherapy.1992.46.3.330 193. Ludwig AM. Mental illness and creative activity in female writers. Am J Psychiatry. 1994;151(11):1650‐1656. doi: 10.1176/ajp.151.11.1650 194. Post F. Creativity and psychopathology a study of 291 world‐famous men. Br J Psychiatry. 1994;165(1):22‐34. doi: 10.1192/bjp.165.1.22 195. Kaufman JC. In: Kaufman JC, ed. Creativity and Mental Illness. Cambridge University Press; 2014. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781139128902 196. Bungay H, Vella‐Burrows T. The effects of participating in creative activities on the health and well‐being of children and young people: a rapid review of the literature. Perspect Public Health. 2013;133(1):44‐52. doi: 10.1177/1757913912466946 197. Cuypers K, Krokstad S, Lingaas Holmen T, Skjei Knudtsen M, Bygren LO, Holmen J. Patterns of receptive and creative cultural activities and their association with perceived health, anxiety, depression and satisfaction with life among adults: the HUNT study, Norway. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2012;66(8):698‐703. doi: 10.1136/jech.2010.113571 198. Forgeard MJC, Eichner K v. Creativity as a target and tool for positive interventions. In: Parks A. C., Schueller S. M. (eds.) The Wiley Blackwell Handbook of Positive Psychological Interventions. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.; 2014:135‐154. doi: 10.1002/9781118315927.ch7 199. Simonton DK. Can creative productivity be both positively and negatively correlated with psychopathology? Yes! Front Psychol. 2014;5:1‐2. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00455 200. Andreasen N. The Creative Brain: the Science of Genius. Plume; 2006. 201. Andreasen N. Creativity and mental illness: prevalence rates in writers and their first‐degree relatives. Am J Psychiatry. 1987;144(10):1288‐1292. doi: 10.1176/ajp.144.10.1288 202. Andreasen N, Powers P. Creativity and psychosis. An examination of conceptual style. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1975;32(1):70. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1975.01760190072008 203. Jamison KR. Mood disorders and patterns of creativity in British writers and artists. Psychiatry. 1989;52(2):125‐134. doi: 10.1080/00332747.1989.11024436 204. Post F. Verbal creativity, depression and alcoholism: an investigation of one hundred American and British writers. Br J Psychiatry. 1996;168(5):545‐555. doi: 10.1192/bjp.168.5.545 205. Carson SH. Creativity and psychopathology: a shared vulnerability model. Can J Psychiatr. 2011;56(3):144‐153. doi: 10.1177/070674371105600304 206. Richards R. Everyday creativity, eminent creativity, and pscyhopathology. Psychol Inq. 1993;4(3):212‐217. doi: 10.1207/s15327965pli0403_12 207. Smith I. Psychostimulants and artistic, musical, and literary creativity. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2015;120:301‐326. doi: 10.1016/bs.irn.2015.04.001 208. Baas M, Boot N, van Gaal S, de Dreu CKW, Cools R. Methylphenidate does not affect convergent and divergent creative processes in healthy adults. NeuroImage. 2020;205:116279. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116279 209. Hoogman M, Stolte M, Baas M, Kroesbergen E. Creativity and ADHD: a review of behavioral studies, the effect of psychostimulants and neural underpinnings. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2020;119:66‐85. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.09.029 210. Treffert D. The savant syndrome: an extraordinary condition. A synopsis: past, present, future. Philos Trans Royal Soc B: Biol Sci. 2009;364(1522):1351‐1357. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0326 211. Treffert D. Savant syndrome: realities, myths and misconceptions. J Autism Dev Disord. 2014;44(3):564‐571. doi: 10.1007/s10803-013-1906-8 212. Treffert D, Rebedew D. The savant syndrome registry: a preliminary report. WMJ. 2015;114(4):158‐162. 213. Code C. Can a cognitive deﬁcitelicit an exceptional ability? A case of savant syndrome in drawing abilities:Nadia. In: Code C, Joanette Y, Lecours AR, Wallesch C‐W, eds. Classic Cases in Neuropsychology, Volume II. Psychology Press; 2013. doi: 10.4324/9780203727126 214. Ramachandran VS, Hirstein W. The science of art a neurological theory of aesthetic experience. J Conscious Stud. 1999;6(7):15‐51. 215. Finger S, Zaidel DW, Boller F, Bogousslavsky J. The Fine Arts, Neurology, and Neuroscience: New Discoveries and Changing Landscapes. Vol 204. Elsevier; 2013. 216. Rose FC. The neurobiology of painting. the Neurobiology of Painting Xv. Elsevier; 2006:341. doi: 10.1016/S0074-7742(06)74027-2 217. Zaidel DW. Art and brain: insights from neuropsychology, biology and evolution. J Anat. 2010;216(2):177‐183. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2009.01099.x 218. Zaidel DW. Creativity, brain, and art: biological and neurological considerations. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014;8:1‐9. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00389 219. Altenmüller E, Schlaug G. Apollo's gift: new aspects of neurologic music therapy. Prog Brain Res. 2015;217:237‐252. doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2014.11.029 220. Lo TLT, Lee JLC, Ho RTH. Creative arts‐based therapies for stroke survivors: a qualitative systematic review. Front Psychol. 2018;9:1‐12. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01646 221. Särkämö T, Soto D. Music listening after stroke: beneficial effects and potential neural mechanisms. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012;1252(1):266‐281. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06405.x 222. Schaefer RS. Auditory rhythmic cueing in movement rehabilitation: findings and possible mechanisms. Phil Trans Royal Soc B: Biol Sci. 2014;369(1658):20130402. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2013.0402 223. Thaut MH. The discovery of human auditory–motor entrainment and its role in the development of neurologic music therapy. Prog Brain Res. 2015;217:253‐266. doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2014.11.030 224. de Souza LC, Volle E, Bertoux M, et al. Poor creativity in frontotemporal dementia: a window into the neural bases of the creative mind. Neuropsychologia. 2010;48(13):3733‐3742. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.09.010 225. Miller BL, Boone K, Cummings JL, Read SL, Mishkin F. Functional correlates of musical and visual ability in frontotemporal dementia. Br J Psychiatry. 2000;176:458‐463. doi: 10.1192/bjp.176.5.458 226. Miller BL, Ponton M, Benson DF, Cummings JL, Mena I. Enhanced artistic creativity with temporal lobe degeneration. Lancet. 1996;348:1744‐1745. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)65881-3 227. Pring L, Ryder N, Crane L, Hermelin B. Creativity in savant artists with autism. Autism. 2012;16(1):45‐57. doi: 10.1177/1362361311403783 228. Schott GD. Pictures as a neurological tool: lessons from enhanced and emergent artistry in brain disease. Brain. 2012;135(6):1947‐1963. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr314 229. Seeley WW, Crawford RK, Zhou J, Miller BL, Greicius MD. Neurodegenerative diseases target large‐scale human brain networks. Neuron. 2009;62(1):42‐52. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.03.024 230. Wu TQ, Miller ZA, Adhimoolam B, et al. Verbal creativity in semantic variant primary progressive aphasia. Neurocase. 2015;21(1):73‐78. doi: 10.1080/13554794.2013.860179 231. Coltheart M. How can functional neuroimaging inform cognitive theories? Perspect Psychol Sci. 2013;8(1):98‐103. doi: 10.1177/1745691612469208 232. Page MPA. What Can't functional neuroimaging tell the cognitive psychologist? Cortex. 2006;42(3):428‐443. doi: 10.1016/S0010-9452(08)70375-7 233. Shallice T. Functional imaging and neuropsychology findings: how can they be linked? NeuroImage. 2003;20(Suppl. 1):S146‐S154. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.09.023 234. Ellis AW, Young AW. Human Cognitive Neuropsychology. Psychology Press; 2013. doi: 10.4324/9780203727041 235. Gurd J. Neuropsychology:past, present, and future. In: Gurd J, Kischka U, Marshall J, eds. The Handbook of Clinical Neuropsychology. 2nd ed. Oxford University Press; 2010. 236. Heilman M, Valenstein E. Neglect and Related Disorders. In: Heilman M, Valenstein E, eds. Clinical Neuropsychology. 5th ed. 2012. Oxford University Press. 237. Schwartz MF, Dell GS. Case series investigations in cognitive neuropsychology. Cogn Neuropsychol. 2010;27(6):477‐494. doi: 10.1080/02643294.2011.574111 238. Agnoli S, Mastria S, Kirsch C, Corazza GE. Creativity in the advertisement domain: the role of experience on creative achievement. Front Psychol. 2019;10:1‐9. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01899 239. Benedek M, Christensen AP, Fink A, Beaty RE. Creativity assessment in neuroscience research. Psychol Aesthet Creat Arts. 2019:218‐226. doi: 10.1037/aca0000215 240. Nusbaum EC, Silvia PJ, Beaty RE. Ready, set, create: what instructing people to “be creative” reveals about the meaning and mechanisms of divergent thinking. Psychol Aesthet Creat Arts. 2014;8(4):423‐432. doi: 10.1037/a0036549 241. Pinkow F. Creative cognition: a multidisciplinary and integrative framework of creative thinking. Creat Innov Manag. 2022:1‐21. doi: 10.1111/caim.12541 242. Fletcher PD, Downey LE, Witoonpanich P, Warren JD. The brain basis of musicophilia: evidence from frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Front Psychol. 2013;4:1‐7. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00347 Associated Data Data Availability Statement Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.